---
title: School is the Best Place for Children
date: 2020-08-14 00:00:00 Z
layout: post
authors:
- given: Simon
  family: Burgess
  institute: University of Bristol
  url: "/people/simon-burgess.html"
- given: Inès
  family: Hassan
  institute: University of Edinburgh
  url: "/people/ines-hassan.html"
- given: Anna
  family: Vignoles
  institute: University of Cambridge
  url: "/people/anna-vignoles.html"
- given: Richard J.
  family: Wilkinson
  url: "/people/rich-wilkinson.html"
  institute: University of Nottingham
---

*This post was originally prepared for 29th July 2020.*

School is the best place for children during the pandemic and the
Government should prioritise keeping schools open wherever possible. Our
[report](https://royalsociety.org/news/2020/07/delve-opening-schools-should-be-prioritised-report/),
published on 24<sup>th</sup> July 2020 outlined why.

The Government’s announcement that all pupils will return to school
after the summer break following six months of home or “blended”
schooling has naturally left parents and guardians anxious. Earlier
plans for a return in June were challenged on safety grounds by
headteachers, unions and experts and many households are juggling
home-schooling and their own work and family commitments.<!--break-->

The costs to children from school closures are considerable, and the
infection risk from opening schools is likely lower than activities like
going to the pub or the gym. Evidence to date suggests that in open
schools, the risks to pupils from Covid-19 are low. Children are very
unlikely to develop serious complications from the virus. There is a
very rare childhood complication from the disease, which affects black
and minority ethnic children to a greater degree, however, this is
extremely uncommon. Children can pass on the disease, so there are some
risks to parents and teachers, but, the risks of transmission within
schools can be reduced through enhanced cleaning and distancing, and
wearing face coverings.

It is definitely harmful for children to be absent from school for long
periods. Most pupils in the UK have lost around 12 weeks of face-to-face
learning, about a third of a year. This will have a significant negative
impact on children’s achievement, particularly for socio economically
disadvantaged children who have fewer resources at home and those for
whom remote teaching has been limited. The impact is likely to be
greater for younger children too, given the evidence that children who
get a good start to their schooling tend to learn more easily later on.

Unless we help children recover from missed schooling, the consequences
may last a lifetime. If young people enter the labour market with poorer
skills, they will be at risk of permanently lower earnings and will be
more likely to live in poverty. Quantifying this effect is difficult.
However, it is estimated that without action to address the effects,
from the mid-2030s and for the 50 years following that, around a quarter
of the entire workforce will have lower skills, lowering the overall
economic growth rate.

The negative impact of school closures is not restricted to loss of
learning. Evidence suggests that closures will have also had lasting
consequences on children’s physical and mental health. Evidence from the
impact of school holidays suggests that children are less active and
have worse diets as a result of being out of school. Moreover, social
isolation and a lack of contact with peers impacts negatively on
children’s mental health, particularly adolescents. The impact is likely
to be even greater for those with pre-existing mental health conditions
and from poor households.

Keeping schools open is also the key to unlocking the rest of the
economy, allowing parents to leave teaching to teachers and return to
their own jobs. If schools do not return full time or we have repeated
lockdowns, the impact on parents, and particularly women, will be
considerable.

*What does the Government need to do before schools open?*

While we are advocating for children to return to school as soon as
possible and for schools to remain open thereafter, the Government must
do everything feasible to ensure that this can be done as safely as
possible.

The most critical step is to ensure low community transmission of the
virus. If local outbreaks occur, then other facilities such as pubs or
gyms where the risk of transmission is high should be closed, before
considering school closures.

Realistic guidance and substantial extra resources such as PPE, cleaning
products, and extra supply teachers must be made available to ensure
schools can minimise infection risk. We also need effective surveillance
with a suitable test-trace-isolate system that enables a *rapid*
response to outbreaks and that can cope with the predicted increased
caseload in the winter.

As we have observed in
[Leicester,](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/leicester-lockdown-what-you-can-and-cannot-do)
future lockdowns are likely to be local. The Government must provide a
clear set of scenario-based objective criteria that trigger actions,
including school closures. Our report provides an example set of
scenarios. There must also be a clear delineation of responsibilities
among the numerous agencies involved in making decisions. Communication
with school leaders, teachers and parents needs to be effective, clear
and unified.

The Government must also prepare for winter by urgently collecting data
that will help us better understand this virus, particularly in
children. Scientists are still uncertain about the susceptibility and
infectiousness of children, but cases of child-to-adult transmission
appear to be relatively uncommon. Local monitoring is needed to provide
real-time data on infection rates, enabling local responses. Only this
week, Health Protection Scotland launched a public
[dashboard](https://public.tableau.com/profile/phs.covid.19#!/vizhome/COVID-19DailyDashboard_15960160643010/Overview)
of COVID-19 to help the public (and schools) understand prevalence by
local area. We also need to mitigate the learning loss. To do that, we
need anonymous assessment of the impact of closures on educational
achievement and pupil mental health. Again this week, the Department for
Education announced
[plans](https://schoolsweek.co.uk/extra-tests-under-consideration-so-dfe-can-measure-lost-lockdown-learning/)
to research the impact of this pandemic on “the academic development of
youngsters” including the recovery of lost learning. We also need to
know more about how to keep schools open safely. This requires
evaluation of the different strategies used in schools to reduce
infection risk.

This is a lot to do in the next few weeks, but we believe that schools
should be at the centre of the Government’s COVID-19 strategy.
Otherwise, we risk our children continuing to pay too high a price for
managing this pandemic.
