---
title: "TTI-TD1: The Potential Role of Firms in Test, Trace, Isolate"
date: 2020-05-27 00:00:00 Z
published: false
layout: addendum
authors:
- given: Tim
  family: Besley
  institute: 
  url: 
ref: TD1
report: TTI
abstract: 
published: true
---

An effective system of TTI has to align with the incentives of firms,
individuals and households. Such a system must look carefully at
incentives and tie the logistics of the TTI system to economic
incentives. For example, a system that demands isolation from work and
family without recognizing the economic costs and trying to compensate
those who lose will make many individuals reluctant to submit to
testing, let alone isolation.[^1] That is why it is essential to have a
system which is integrated into the system of measures which are already
in place for supporting firms and workers. This is particularly
important as the furlough system is rolled back. Even as it ceases to be
a core means of income support, it can play a crucial role in creating
incentives for an effective TTI system. Social incentives, responses to
messaging and a sense of pro-sociality matter too. But should be based
on robust evidence that compliance can be achieved.

Effective delivery of TTI has to combine household delivery and
firm-level delivery. As the economy opens up, this will mean extending
the system beyond the health and social care centres encompassing
workers in all parts of the economy. The structure of the UK economy
gives a clue to the scale of the challenge. There are around 28 million
employed workers in the UK scattered across around 5.9 million firms
with about 40% of all employment in the 7700 businesses that have more
than 250 employees. About 5.8 million firms have fewer than 50 employees
and around 4.9 million have no employees.[^2] On top of this, there are
just under 5 million registered self-employed.

Since many businesses are keen to open up, it is not unreasonable to
enlist their assistance in delivering public health measures. And
establishing this for TTI will be useful if a vaccine is discovered and
needs to be rolled out. Giving firms a role in administering key public
programs is not unprecedented and has been key to the governmentâ€™s
furlough program. Firms already administer sickness pay schemes and
maternity pay schemes which require delegated compliance. And the whole
of the tax system (at least VAT, national insurance and income taxes)
require firms to be the main agent acting on behalf of the government.
This would be a new way of regulating the economy but possibly the only
way to get a balance between economic cost and public health.

To make a TTI system work, the first step would be to provide a risk
assessment of each type of business based on the way that it deals with
customers and employees. This must include an assessment based in part
on transportation usage. Some of this could be done on a self-reported
basis with a monitoring and auditing system to ensure compliance. It
could begin with large employers and then be rolled out to smaller
businesses. Based on this, the system could assess a frequency for
testing for employees and apply for this through an official testing
scheme with employers being responsible for compliance by workers.
Positive test results could be tied to employer-administered furlough
grants for a period of isolation but only an employee could not be
assigned to home work (this would be an extension of current sickness
pay arrangements which would, in any case, be operative for employees
showing symptoms). Employers could also be incentivized to ensure that
their employees using tracing apps where appropriate. A scheme such as
this would have a useful bi-product of creating usable data on the
spread of infection by location and age group. Over time, the scheme
could be rolled out to smaller firms, particularly those where risks are
particularly high by location or nature of business. Self-employed
workers could also be given access to testing facilities in due course.

Targeting is essential to make best use of scarce testing capacity. This
means categorizing businesses according to risk and offering testing on
this basis. The criterion should not be the transmission rate associated
with the business, but the marginal benefit associated with testing a
business which would depend on how bringing it into the testing system
reduces the spread of the infection and creates economic value. Lines of
business where the transmission rate cannot be controlled by TTI and are
high will have to remain closed. But if the transmission rate is low,
for example, due to the location of the business or the effectiveness of
other measures to reduce transmission, there is also a need to cover it
with TTI. How much TTI can increase economic value by getting people
back to work should also be a factor in deciding where to target
resources. Developing systematic criteria will make the system more
effective. This process can, and should be, evidence-based. It can be
enhanced by using standard economic data which is available in existing
surveys and particularly in HMRC given that it is administering the
furlough program.

As with the furlough program, reaching the self-employed creates a
particular challenge given the informality of much of the work that they
do. They are a heterogenous group, not only in the type of work that
they do, but also in terms of the extent to which they engage in high
risk activities in terms of transmission. Many are in sectors which will
remain closed for the foreseeable future. Some are sub-contractors to
larger firms and hence could fall under any workplace schemes. But it
would be necessary to assess what kind of special provision is needed
for them. They are less well covered by the furlough scheme and are
therefore particularly keen to return to work. Even if they can be
reached by a testing program, isolation without compensation would
create poor incentives to be tested so some kind of bespoke program
would have to be built which recognizes this challenge. But it could
also encompass very small businesses which have zero employees. As with
larger employers, building TTI together with the follow-on arrangements
under the furlough program is essential recognizing that economic
incentives have to be compatible with any TTI scheme.

This employee based system would also leave out key groups for whom
alternative testing arrangements would have to be found, most notably
home carers, vulnerable groups (who are already self-isolating), those
who are not active in labour markets (there are around 12 million
retirees) and children (around 12 million are currently under age 16).
Harnessing existing social networks can aid information diffusion and
trust.[^3] Even small individual incentives for testing can also be
important.[^4]

[^1]: Attitudinal data from a study in Israel is consistent with the
    idea that compensation is important. The authors of the study asked
    respondents about their hypothetical willingness to comply with
    self-isolation with and without compensation for lost wages. If
    compensation was offered, then 94% said that they would comply but
    this dropped to 57% without compensation; see Bodas, M. and Peleg,
    K. (2020) Self-Isolation Compliance In The COVID-19 Era Influenced
    By Compensation: Findings From A Recent Survey In Israel, Health
    Affairs (doi: [10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00382](https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/full/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00382)).
    The wider literature surveyed in Webster et al. (2020) is more
    equivocal identifying a range of factors in shaping compliance
    including knowledge about the disease, the procedures used, social
    norms, perceived risk of the disease and financial considerations
    due to loss of earnings. See: Webster, R., Brooks, S., Smith, L.,
    Woodland, L., Wessely, S., and Rubin, G. (2020) How to improve
    adherence with quarantine: rapid review of the evidence, 182,
    163-169 (doi: 10.1016/j.puhe.2020.03.007). A small-scale study of
    the SARS epidemic in Toronto also mentions financial compensation as
    a factor but cannot isolate its importance given the approach taken.
    DiGiovanni, C., Conley, J., Chiu, D. and Zaborski, J. (2004) Factors
    influencing compliance with quarantine in Toronto during the 2003
    SARS Outbreak, Biosecurity and Bioterrorism: Biodefense Strategy,
    Practice and Science, 2, 4, 265-72 (doi: [<span
    class="underline">10.1089/bsp.2004.2.265</span>](https://doi.org/10.1089/bsp.2004.2.265)).

[^2]: UK Government (2019) Business population estimates for the UK and
    the regions 2019, available at: <https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/852919/Business_Population_Estimates_for_the_UK_and_regions_-_2019_Statistical_Release.pdf>

[^3]: There is an emerging body of evidence from RCTs in developing
    countries that this is important. For example: Tarozzi, A.,
    Maertens, R., Ahmend, K. and van Geen, A. (2017) Water Testing
    Delivery Strategies to Reduce Arsenic Exposure through Safe Well
    Selection in Bangladesh, see: <https://www.povertyactionlab.org/evaluation/water-testing-delivery-strategies-reduce-arsenic-exposure-through-safe-well-selection>

[^4]: Thornton, R., Godlonton, S., Angotti, N., Bula, A., Gaydosh, L.,
    Yeatman, S., Kimchi, E. (2006) The Demand for and Impact of Learning
    HIV Status in Malawi. See: <https://www.povertyactionlab.org/evaluation/demand-and-impact-learning-hiv-status-malawi>
