---
title: "TTI-TD4: A Review of International Approaches to Test, Trace, Isolate"	date: 2020-05-27 
published: true	
layout: addendum	
authors:	
- given: Genevie	
  family: Fernandes	
  institute: 	
  url: 	
- given: Devi	
  family: Sridhar	
  institute: 	
  url: 	
- given: Diva	
  family: Fanian	
  institute: 	
  url: 	
- given: Mariana	
  family: Soto Pachecho	
  institute: 	
  url: 	
ref: TD4	
report: TTI	
abstract: 
---

TTI strategies have been developed by countries across the world,
including Germany, South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, New Zealand and
Iceland, as part of their efforts to lower the number of COVID-19 cases
and minimise related deaths. A review of these international approaches
around this strategy offers insights for the UK.

1.  Each of these countries initiated this strategy as soon as the first
    COVID-19 cases were reported and have been consistently implementing
    it, with the three components of testing, contact tracing and
    isolation being implemented in tandem.

2.  Each of these countries have an expanded testing criteria in place.
    All countries use polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests for
    symptomatic cases, high risk individuals, and health workers. South
    Korea, New Zealand and Iceland have gone a step further by
    introducing mass testing for individuals at the community level
    regardless of symptoms. Germany and Iceland have also started
    conducting antibody testing. One area that needs to be further
    investigated is the consideration of repeat testing, especially for
    health workers as they have repeated risk of exposure.

3.  Random community testing and antibody tests are being used to inform
    countries’ future steps such as plans to exit from lockdowns.

4.  All these countries offer testing across traditional healthcare
    settings (clinics and hospitals) as well as novel locations (drive
    through centres, walk-through centres, mobile sites outside
    supermarkets).

5.  These countries have managed contact tracing through a combination
    of physical teams (consisting of multisectoral public staff), big
    data analytics and mobile-based applications. Four countries (South
    Korea, Singapore, New Zealand and Iceland) initiate contact tracing
    after a confirmed positive test results; whereas in Taiwan, this
    process begins even within a suspected case. South Korea, for
    instance, leverages technology to aid its contact tracing efforts.
    The government has an ICT system that automatically integrates GPS
    data, credit card information and CCTV footage to create a moving
    history (transmission route) for the confirmed case in a span of 10
    minutes. This data is verified by patient interviews, contacts are
    then identified and sent automated text messages on the same day.
    The transmission route of the confirmed patients (anonymised) is
    also uploaded on government websites, so that citizens can avoid
    these places to reduce the risk of transmission.

6.  The total time for TTI (i.e. from testing, tracing and tracking
    contacts to instructing contacts to isolate) is around 2 to 3 days
    in South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, and New Zealand. Test results in
    these four countries are available in 4 to 5 hours.

7.  While digital applications can aid contact tracing teams, they can
    also raise privacy concerns, for example relating to the risk of
    personal data being repurposed for causes other than outbreak
    control, and concerns about location and duration of storage of
    personal data. Iceland has tried to address these privacy concerns
    before launching their contact tracing application, by gaining
    certification by an independent reviewer, making it voluntary for
    users to download the application and agree to share GPS
    information, and storing anonymised data on the user’s device.

8.  In all the six countries, close contacts, once identified, must
    self-isolate for 14 days and seek testing on displaying any
    symptoms. Approaches to ensure isolation and quarantine measures
    vary across countries. While Germany, New Zealand and Iceland have
    recommended isolation for certain individuals, South Korea, Taiwan
    and Singapore have made quarantine mandatory and enforce it through
    the use of smartphone applications and fines.

9.  Countries made use of existing national capabilities in implementing
    this strategy. Germany and South Korea used their robust
    biotechnology industry and laboratory networks and Iceland employed
    a public-private partnership to ramp up testing. Singapore and
    Taiwan used big data and multisectoral response teams.

10. A range of challenges implementing TTI have already been reported,
    including staff fatigue (especially frontline and laboratory staff),
    logistical hurdles of sourcing testing materials, privacy concerns
    over smart phone applications, and public adherence to social
    distancing and isolation guidance.

The tables that follow give an overview of approaches to TTI in Germany,
South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, New Zealand and Iceland.

## Germany

| Total population                            | 82.79 million    |
| Date of first reported case of COVID-19[^1] | 25 February 2020 |

### Epidemiological situation[^2]

Confirmed | 174,478
Deaths | 7,884
Recovered | 150,000

### Testing[^3] [^4] [^5] [^6] [^7] [^8] 

#### Who gets tested?

Initially, those with symptoms, travel history and close contact with
confirmed cases were tested. Since 25 March 2020, the testing criteria
has been relaxed to include anyone who has symptoms including healthcare
workers.

#### What kind of tests are being used?

Real-time PCR assay is being used. Germany developed its first rapid PCR
test on 16 January. Since February, a nationwide network set up between
doctors’ practices, normally used to monitor the flu, is being used for
testing for COVID-19. Labs are also using pooled testing procedures that
produce reliable results in short times, thereby increasing the overall
testing capacity. Antibody testing is also being conducted, drawing from
blood donation services, samples from regions with large outbreaks and
representative samples from the broader population.

#### Where are tests conducted?

*  Healthcare facilities
*  Drive-through testing centres

#### What is the daily testing capacity?

As of May 11, a total of 3,147,771 tests have been conducted. Daily
testing capacity as of 21 April was reported at 1,20,000 tests a day.
Tests per million: 37,857.

### Contact tracing [^9] [^10] [^11]

Under Germany's contact tracing policy, implemented as soon as first
cases were recorded, every person who has come into contact with an
infected patient in the last two weeks is tracked and tested. Public
contact tracing teams use phone calls to trace and monitor close
contacts. Contact tracing teams will soon be assisted with Germany’s
home-grown smartphone app, developed for the Robert Koch Institute, to
trace infections. Further, mobile carriers in Germany have started to
share cell phone location data with health officials in an aggregated,
anonymized format. On 21 March, the German health ministry also drafted
changes to the Infection Protection Act to allow, among other things,
the tracking of people who were in contact with those infected with the
coronavirus.

North-Rhine Westphalia, the country’s largest state and one of the worst
affected by the coronavirus outbreak, currently has 3,385 people
employed in contact tracing. The federal government announced that each
state was expected to have at least one team of 5 contact tracers for
every 20,000 people, and 11 of 16 states have met this target. The
federal government has recruited 362 containment scouts (plus 130 are
being trained) to operate alongside contact tracers in about 400 local
health authorities spread across the country.

### Isolation[^12] [^13] 

Since late February, self-isolation for 14 days on becoming symptomatic
or having close contacts with confirmed or suspected cases is a
recommended measure. Visits and events in nursing homes are cancelled in
an effort to isolate and shield the over 800,000 seniors who live in
around 11,700 facilities across the country.

### Facilitators[^14] [^15] 

Early response, strong biotechnology industry and laboratory testing
capacity, decentralised diagnostic system have been the major
facilitators for Germany’s test, trace and isolate strategy for
COVID-19.

### Challenges[^16] [^17] 

Regional bodies have reported bottlenecks such as the struggle to
recruit additional staff to deal with increased workload and backlog as
well as coordinating with the limited number of global suppliers for
testing materials. Privacy concerns have been raised around mobile-based
applications, particularly on the location of the data storage viz.
government hosted central servers versus decentralised on user phones,
with the latter being recommended by privacy experts.

##  South Korea

| Total population[^18]                        | 51.47 million   |
| Date of first reported case of COVID-19[^19] | 20 January 2020 |

### Epidemiological situation[^20]

Confirmed | 11,018
Deaths | 260

### Testing[^21]

#### Who gets tested?

Mass testing began in February regardless of symptoms or travel history.
Test results are delivered between 24 to 72 hours, via text messages or
phone calls along with corresponding advice. Around 20% of all those who
tested positive were found to be asymptomatic.

#### What kind of tests are being used?

Real-time PCR assay is being used. As of 15 April 2020, five diagnostic
reagent companies (Companies KogeneBiotech, Seegene, Solgent, SD
Biosensor, and Biosewoom) have obtained emergency use approval from the
Korean Center for Disease Control and are producing RT-PCR reagents in
the country.

#### Where are tests conducted?

-   Primary health clinics and hospitals

-   Public health and environment research institutes

-   Private healthcare providers

-   Drive-through testing centres

-   Walk-through testing centres

#### What is the daily testing capacity?

As of 15 May 2020, 726,747 tests have been conducted, leading to nearly
11,000 tests per million.[^22] Daily testing capacity increased from 200
in January to 20,000 in March. Tests per million: 14,055[^23] [^24]

### Contact tracing[^25]

Korean public health authorities, national police agency, financial
services commission, and local governments collaborated for contact
tracing through interviews, analysis of closed-circuit television,
credit card and smartphone GPS data, and publicizing the moving
histories of anonymised COVID-19 patients on the Ministry of Health
website (all measures are legally sanctioned by the government).The
effective contact tracing system, known as the COVID-19 Smart Management
System, is run by the Korean Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and can analyse a person’s movements in just 10 minutes. This moving
history (i.e. transmission route) of the confirmed case is verified with
the patient interview and then contacts are identified and notified
through automated text messages.

### Isolation [^26] [^27] [^28] [^29]

South Korea uses a combination of local teams, mobile-based applications
and fines to ensure mandatory 14-day quarantine for asymptomatic cases,
those with minimal symptoms, close contacts of confirmed cases, as well
as those who have tested negative.

The primary case is classified based on the severity (mild, moderate,
severe and extremely severe). Mild cases are isolated at local
specialised clinics called ‘living and treatment support centres.
Moderate, severe and extremely severe are hospitalised at national
infectious disease hospitals and hospitals that were designated
specifically for this at each location.

The government-endorsed Corona 100m (Co100) application, launched on
February 11, using government data, alerts users when they come within
100 metres of a location visited by a confirmed case. Another government
GPS-based application named ‘self-quarantine safety protection’ launched
on March 7, enforces self-quarantine measures. South Koreans are
encouraged to download this application after getting tested. If they
are advised to self-quarantine based on test results, then they have to
input their symptoms into the mobile application twice a day for the
period of the quarantine, and the application will monitor their
locations and set off an alarm if they leave their designated quarantine
location. For those who do not use the application, a local monitoring
team calls twice daily to make sure the quarantined stay put and check
for symptoms. Citizens and international visitors are also encouraged to
use a government-based self-diagnosis mobile application, launched on
February 12, allows users to monitor health conditions and access
readily available information on follow-up actions such as physical
check-ups, using helplines and finding clinics.

Quarantine violators face up to 3 million won ($2500) fines. If a recent
bill becomes law, the fine will go up to 10 million won and as much as a
year in jail.

### Facilitators[^30] 

Preparedness, early response, government leadership and transparent
communication, and innovations have been the key facilitators for
ensuring that the test, trace and isolate strategy works. Following the
2015 MERS outbreak, the government invested in its research and
development for PCR testing kits, creating financial incentive for
competition among private biomedical companies to develop rapid
diagnostic tools. In the last week of January 2020, South Korean health
officials convened a meeting with representatives from more than 20
medical companies on developing rapid testing kits, and by early
February, two companies received approval for PCR tests. Transparent
government communication has been demonstrated by daily press briefings
and emergency texts to all citizens. Innovations including drive-through
and walk-in test centres have speeded up the testing and have been
adopted around the world.

### Challenges[^31] [^32] [^33]

Challenges have included privacy concerns owing to publicising people’s
movements, health worker fatigue, unintended negative economic
consequences on businesses as people avoid places that have been visited
by confirmed or suspected cases, and hardships for vulnerable groups due
to mandatory quarantine.

##  Taiwan

| Total population                             | 23.78 million   |
| Date of first reported case of COVID-19[^34] | 21 January 2020 |

### Epidemiological situation[^35]

| Confirmed |  440 
| Deaths    |  7
| Recovered | 383

### Testing[^36] [^37] [^38] [^39] [^40]

#### Who gets tested?

Targeted testing for symptomatic individuals with travel history, close
contact with suspected or confirmed cases, and vulnerable individuals
including patients with severe respiratory symptoms and healthcare
workers with pneumonia. Most recently, any patients who report a loss of
the sense of smell or taste are mandated to be tested.

#### What kind of tests are being used?

PCR tests began in January. In early March, Taiwanese genome researchers
developed a rapid COVID-19 diagnostic test, which reduces time to test
from the current 4 hours to 15 minutes. With funding from Taiwan, in
early April, Taiwan and Denmark jointly developed ViroTrack, a
diagnostic test that can produce a result within 12 minutes, indicating
whether the person is carrying the virus or has recovered from a
COVID-19 infection.

#### Where are tests conducted?

* Taiwan Centers for Disease Control
* Designated hospitals

#### What is the daily testing capacity?

As of May 15,2020, 68,659 tests have been conducted. Daily testing
capacity for COVID-19 is approximately 1,300 samples. Tests per million:
2909.

### Contact tracing[^41] [^42] 

Taiwan’s contact tracing teams are heavily aided by big data analytics.
The country leveraged its digital national health insurance database and
integrated it with its immigration and customs database to generate
real-time alerts during a clinical visit based on travel history and
clinical symptoms to aid case identification. The government also
creates real-time digital updates alerting citizens to avoid locations
where infections had been detected. Once confirmed cases are identified,
close contacts are traced, and then digital fencing is utilised to
ensure mandatory quarantines. The example of case 19 indicates that from
the active tracing of this person \[a sweep of cases that showed
influenza symptoms but tested negative for influenza\] to tracing and
testing their close contacts (mostly family members) 48-72 hours
transpired.

### Isolation[^43]

The government enforces a mandatory 14-day home quarantine through a
mobile-based location-tracking application that essentially geofences
those at high risk (travellers from high risk areas, close contacts of
suspected or confirmed cases). Home quarantines are monitored by the
police and flouting these rules can result in heavy fines.

### Facilitators[^44] [^45] 

Taiwan effectively delayed and contained community transmission as a
result of its preparedness owing to the SARS outbreak (including
outbreak simulations), early and multisectoral response, transparent
communication, big data analytics, and digital tracking. Public
acceptance of its protective policies has been influenced by the SARS
experience.

### Challenges

Taiwan will have to expand its testing criteria as community
transmission spreads. Concerns have been raised regarding the digital
tracking of those under quarantine as well as the heavy fines imposed.
Finally, it is unclear if the current intensive nature of Taiwan’s
response can be maintained until the end of the epidemic.

##  Singapore

| Total population                             | 5.6 million     |
| Date of first reported case of COVID-19[^46] | 23 January 2020 |

### Epidemiological situation

Confirmed | 26,098
Deaths | 21
Recovered | 5973

### Testing[^47] [^48] [^49]

#### Who gets tested?

Any individual (citizens, migrants, visitors) who are symptomatic, or
have been in contact with a confirmed case, or are at high-risk
including healthcare workers and those with pneumonia regardless of
symptoms.

#### What kind of tests are being used?

PCR test. Singapore developed its first rapid diagnostic test in early
February and since March, ten companies have received provisional
government authorisation for COVID-19 tests that can be supplied to
healthcare institutions, private hospitals, medical clinics and clinical
laboratories.

#### Where are tests conducted?

* Public hospitals
* Public Health Preparedness Clinics (GPs)

#### What is the daily testing capacity?

As of May 10, Singapore has tested 224,262 individuals, which accounts
to 39,319 tests per million.

### Contact tracing[^50] [^51]

Public health staff have been working in partnership with police and
detectives from the Criminal Investigation Department, in teams of 10,
for 7 days a week, to trace, test and isolate contacts of patients with
COVID-19. These teams have been using interviews, CCTV analysis, and the
recently launched government mobile application ‘Trace Together’ for
contact tracing. The government encourages the public to download this
application on their mobile phones, which then uses Bluetooth technology
to track and identify close contacts of a patient with COVID-19,
including timestamps. Individual patients can choose to allow the
Ministry of Health to access the data in the application to identify
close contacts.

### Isolation[^52] [^53] 

Since 27 January, people returning to Singapore from hot zones
(countries with widespread community transmission) were given a ‘leave
of absence’, where they don’t go to work but can leave their homes for
meals and necessities. From 28 January, suspected carriers are being
given a ‘quarantine order’ (QO) and have to be isolated at home or a
government facility. On 18 February, the government announced the ‘stay
at home notice’ (SHN), wherein all Singaporeans have to stay at home for
14 days and can leave their residence to purchase daily necessities and
attend to important personal matters. Those who flout SHN or the QO may
face penalties and can be prosecuted under Section 21A of the Infectious
Disease Act. Singaporeans can also calculate the number of days of
social distancing based on their arrival in the country, using a
government-based website.

### Facilitators

Multisectoral task force, early response, targeted testing and rigorous
contact tracing, and timely and transparent communication have served as
facilitators.

### Challenges[^54] [^55]

It appears that Singapore was slow to test in the crowded dormitories
leading to a large cluster of cases among migrant populations.
Government enforced social distancing is difficult to follow in such
crowded settings. More than half of the 43 registered dormitories have
reported active viral clusters. The government has now responded by
placing medical teams within the dormitories and enforcing quarantines.

## New Zealand

| Total population                        | 4.88 million     |
| Date of first reported case of COVID-19 | 28 February 2020 |

### Epidemiological situation[^56]

Confirmed | 1498
Deaths | 21
Recovered | 1421

### Testing[^57] [^58] 

#### Who gets tested?

Any individual with symptoms can be tested, including health workers and
those at high risk. Random community testing started in April.

#### What kind of tests are being used?

PCR tests.

#### Where are tests conducted?

*  Public health facilities
*  Mobile clinics (set up for community testing in settings such as supermarkets and car parks)

#### What is the daily testing capacity?

As of 13 May 2020, there have been 209,613 tests completed in total.
Tests per million: 42,061

### Contact tracing[^59] [^60]

New Zealand has 12 public health units (PHU) that manage health services
for clusters of its districts. Contact tracing is conducted by each PHU,
which is supported by the centralised ‘National close contact service’
(NCCS) hub that sits within the Ministry of Health and has been
operational since 24 March. PHUs continue to receive notifications of
new confirmed or probable cases from laboratories and clinicians. PHUs
experiencing heavy workloads can choose to divert parts of the workflow
to the NCCS. PHUs inform the case of their result, arrange their
home-isolation and identify close contacts.

Close contacts who live with the index case are managed by the PHU.
Other contacts can be transferred to the NCCS for tracing. These lists
of close contacts, which take various forms, are forwarded to the NCCS
either via entry into REDCap (an existing web-based database used by
some Public Health Units), secure file transfer, or email. The NCCS has
developed a ‘finding service’ that seeks contact information from
various health and other government datasets. NCCS staff call close
contacts and advise they are contacts of a COVID-19 case and obtain the
contacts’ agreement to quarantine (commonly called self-isolation). As
of April, contact tracing application is in the process of being
developed.

### Isolation[^61] 

Apart from self-isolation for close contacts of suspected or confirmed
cases, on March 23, New Zealand imposed a lockdown requiring all
citizens except essential workers to stay home at all times, unless they
are accessing vital services or walking for exercise.

### Facilitators[^62]

Strong government leadership, early and coordinated government response,
transparent and empathetic communication have been the major
facilitators for ensuring New Zealand’s test-trace-isolate strategy.

### Challenges[^63] 

Logistical hurdles of sourcing kits and testing materials, challenges in
contact tracing (to be offset by increased funding and staffing) and
public breaches of lockdown measures have been reported as issues.

## Iceland

| Total population                             | 364,164         |
| Date of first reported case of COVID-19[^64] | 28 February 2020 |

### Epidemiological situation

Confirmed | 1802
Deaths | 10
Recovered | 1780

### Testing[^65] [^66] [^67] [^68]

#### Who gets tested?

Targeted testing of persons living in Iceland who are at high risk for
infection (mainly those who are symptomatic, with travel history to risk
areas, or had contact with infected persons) began on 31 January. This
targeted approach is supplemented with mass population screening
(initiated on 13 March) using two strategies: issuing an open invitation
to 10,797 persons and sending random invitations to 2283 persons. Nearly
50% of positive cases are asymptomatic.

#### What kind of tests are being used?

PCR tests. Screening for antibodies started on 8 April 2020.

#### Where are tests conducted?

*  Symptomatic and those at high risk are tested at the national public hospital
*  Mass screening conducted in clinics by biopharma company deCODE genetics

#### What is the daily testing capacity?

As of May 13, 55,075 people have been tested. The daily testing capacity
is 2600. Tests per million: 151,197.

#### Contact tracing[^69] [^70] 

Iceland’s contact tracing team is about 160 members strong and operates
from part of a hotel in the capital. This team includes public health
staff, police and experts in counter-terrorism and organised crime. All
individuals who tested positive for COVID-19 are contacted by telephone
by a team designated by the public health authorities to track their
infection and contacts. All registered contacts are interviewed by
telephone, asked about their symptoms, and requested to go into 2 weeks
of quarantine. Those with symptoms and those in whom symptoms developed
in quarantine are tested for COVID-19. Contact tracing teams are also
aided by a government-backed mobile application that was launched on 1
April.

### Isolation[^71]

All individuals who test positive for COVID-19 are required to
self-isolate until 10 days after fever had subsided or until they tested
negative, and all contacts of these individuals are required to
self-quarantine for 2 weeks. To protect the elderly and other groups who
are at increased risk for serious illness, health authorities promoted
self-isolation and banned visits to nursing homes and hospitals.
Icelanders returning to the country must also go into quarantine.

### Facilitators

Early response, public-private partnership for wide scale testing and
transparent government communication have been the key facilitators for
Iceland’s success in containing COVID-19.

### Challenges[^72]

Logistical issues such as a shortage of tests at certain points have
acted as barriers for Iceland’s control and tracing efforts.

[^1]: Reuters (2020) Man infected with coronavirus in Germany after
    Italy trip -state ministry. 25 February 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-health-germany-idUSKBN20J2K2>

[^2]: Robert Koch Institut (2020) COVID-19 Dashboard. Available at:
    [<span
    class="underline">https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/478220a4c454480e823b17327b2bf1d4</span>](https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/478220a4c454480e823b17327b2bf1d4)

[^3]: Focus (2020) Statistikerin fordert Tests, die endlich das wahre
    Corona-Ausmaß in Deutschland Zeigen, 25 March 2020. Available at:
    https://www.focus.de/gesundheit/news/es-grassiert-ungewissheit-repraesentative-tests-sollen-wahres-ausmass-in-deutschland-zeigen\_id\_11813688.html

[^4]: NPR (2020) Germany is conducting nation-wide covid-19 antibody
    testing. 21 April 2020. Available at:
    https://www.npr.org/sections/coronavirus-live-updates/2020/04/21/839594202/germany-is-conducting-nationwide-covid-19-antibody-testing

[^5]: The Spectator (2020) How Germany has managed to perform so many
    covid-19 tests. 6 April 2020. Available at:
    https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/how-germany-has-managed-to-perform-so-many-covid-19-tests

[^6]: Robert Koch Institut (2020) Täglicher Lagebericht des RKI zur
    Coronavirus, 22 April 2020. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://www.rki.de/DE/Content/InfAZ/N/Neuartiges\_Coronavirus/Situationsberichte/2020-04-22-de.pdf?\_\_blob=publicationFile</span>](https://www.rki.de/DE/Content/InfAZ/N/Neuartiges_Coronavirus/Situationsberichte/2020-04-22-de.pdf?__blob=publicationFile)

[^7]: Healthcare in Europe (2020) Corona 'pool testing' increases
    worldwide capacities many times over, 1 April 2020. Available at:
    https://healthcare-in-europe.com/en/news/corona-pool-testing-increases-worldwide-capacities-many-times-over.html\#

[^8]: New York Post (2020) German hospital launches drive-thru
    coronavirus testing, 10 March 2020. Available at
    https://nypost.com/2020/03/10/german-hospital-launches-drive-thru-coronavirus-testing/

[^9]: The Telegraph (2020) Contact tracing: how will the UK's test,
    track and trace plan help ease lockdown, 14 May 2020. Available at:
    [<span class="underline">
    https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/0/contact-tracing-uk-lockdown/</span>](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/0/contact-tracing-uk-lockdown/)

[^10]: Science (2020) Cellphone tracking could help stem the spread of
    coronavirus. Is privacy the price?, 22 March 2020. Available at:
    [<span
    class="underline">https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/03/cellphone-tracking-could-help-stem-spread-coronavirus-privacy-price\#</span>](https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/03/cellphone-tracking-could-help-stem-spread-coronavirus-privacy-price)

[^11]: Nardelli, A. (2020).Germany Has Shared The Details Of Its
    Coronavirus Contact Tracing Operation. The UK Won’t. BuzzFeedNews.
    Published May 09, 2020. [<span
    class="underline">https://www.buzzfeed.com/albertonardelli/germany-uk-coronavirus-contact-tracing-compared</span>](https://www.buzzfeed.com/albertonardelli/germany-uk-coronavirus-contact-tracing-compared)

[^12]: Business Insider (2020) Germany has remarkably few COVID-19
    deaths. Its healthcare system shows how Germany prevented a runaway
    death toll, 2 April 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.businessinsider.com/why-germany-has-a-low-covid-19-mortality-rate-2020-4?r=US&IR=T>

[^13]: DW (2020) German retirement homes isolate the elderly from
    COVID-19 threat, 9 April 2020. Available at :[<span
    class="underline">https://www.dw.com/en/german-retirement-homes-isolate-the-elderly-from-covid-19-threat/a-53082145</span>](https://www.dw.com/en/german-retirement-homes-isolate-the-elderly-from-covid-19-threat/a-53082145)

[^14]: [The Medical Futurist (2020) How Germany Leveraged Digital Health
    to Combat COVID-19, 9 April 2020. Available at: <span
    class="underline">https://medicalfuturist.com/how-germany-leveraged-digital-health-to-combat-covid-19/</span>](https://medicalfuturist.com/how-germany-leveraged-digital-health-to-combat-covid-19/)

[^15]: The Spectator (2020) How Germany has managed to perform so many
    covid-19 tests. 6 April 2020. Available at:
    https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/how-germany-has-managed-to-perform-so-many-covid-19-tests

[^16]: The Guardian (2020) Germany told it needs to massively increase
    coronavirus testing, 2 April 2020. Available at:
    https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/02/germany-told-it-needs-to-massively-increase-coronavirus-testing

[^17]: CNN Business (2020) Wary Germans hate sharing their data. Will
    they use a COVID-19 tracking app? 25 April 2020. Available at:
    https://edition.cnn.com/2020/04/25/tech/coronavirus-contact-tracing-germany-privacy/index.html

[^18]: The World Bank (2020) Population, total, data catalogue.
    Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/sp.pop.totl</span>](https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/sp.pop.totl)

[^19]: Korean Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020) Press
    Release: The first imported case of the novel coronavirus
    (2019-nCoV) in Korea, 20 January 2020. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">
    https://www.cdc.go.kr/board/board.es?mid=a30402000000&bid=0030</span>](https://www.cdc.go.kr/board/board.es?mid=a30402000000&bid=0030)

[^20]: Ministry of Health, Government of South Korea (2020) Official
    Update of COVID -19 Situation in South Korea. 30 March 2020.
    Available at: <http://ncov.mohw.go.kr/en/> & <https://coronaboard.kr/>

[^21]: Government of South Korea. How Korea responded to the pandemic
    using ICT, 16 April 2020. Available at: <http://www.moj.go.kr/moj\_eng/1765/subview.do;jsessionid=\_lbCnPNdLFYNs-Kih5hWY48vT1aeaCIC-Zwk14oH.wizard-8-dpzr7?enc=Zm5jdDF8QEB8JTJGYmJzJTJGbW9qX2VuZyUyRjUxJTJGNTIyODIyJTJGYXJ0Y2xWaWV3LmRvJTNG>

[^22]: Korean Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020)
    Coronavirus Disease-19 data. Accessed 14 May 2020. Available at:
    <http://ncov.mohw.go.kr/en/</span>](http://ncov.mohw.go.kr/en/>

[^23]: Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of South Korea
    (2020) Press Release: IMS meeting for Novel Coronavirus presided
    over by the Prime Minister, 13 February 2020. Available at: <https://www.mohw.go.kr/eng/nw/nw0101vw.jsp?PAR_MENU_ID=1007&MENU_ID=100701&page=1&CONT_SEQ=352865>

[^24]: BBC (2020) Coronavirus in South Korea: How 'trace, test and
    treat' may be saving lives, 12 March 2020. Available at: <https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-51836898>;<https://coronaboard.kr/>

[^25]: Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020) Contact
    Transmission of COVID-19 in South Korea: Novel Investigation
    Techniques for Tracing Contacts, Osong Public Health Res Perspect
    2020;11(1):60-63 (doi: 0.24171/j.phrp.2020.11.1.09)

[^26]: Asian Boss (2020) Interview with Professor Kim Woo-joo from Korea
    University Guro Hospital. 27 March 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=1903&v=gAk7aX5hksU&feature=emb_logo>

[^27]: Zastrow, M. (2020) South Korea is reporting intimate details of
    COVID-19 cases: has it helped? Nature News, 18 March 2020. Available
    at: <https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-00740-y>

[^28]: Normile, D. (2020) Coronavirus cases have dropped sharply in
    South Korea. What’s the secret to its success? Science, 17 March
    2020. Available at: <https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/03/coronavirus-cases-have-dropped-sharply-south-korea-whats-secret-its-success>

[^29]: Juhwan Oh, Jong-Koo Lee, Dan Schwarz, Hannah L. Ratcliffe,
    Jeffrey F. Markuns & Lisa R. Hirschhorn. National Response to
    COVID-19 in the Republic of Korea and Lessons Learned for Other
    Countries. Health Systems & Reform, 2020, Vol. 6.

[^30]: Fendos J. (2020) Lessons From South Korea’s COVID-19 Outbreak:
    The Good, Bad, and Ugly. 10 March 2020. The Diplomat. Available at:
    <https://thediplomat.com/2020/03/lessons-from-south-koreas-covid-19-outbreak-the-good-bad-and-ugly/>

[^31]: Al Jazeera (2020) Testing times: Why South Korea's COVID-19
    strategy is working. 21 March 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/upfront/2020/03/testing-times-south-korea-covid-19-strategy-working-200320051718670.html>

[^32]: Yonhap News Agency (2020) Medical staff under pressure amid
    spiking virus cases in S. Korea. 2 March 2020. Available at:
    <https://en.yna.co.kr/view/AEN20200302002500320>

[^33]: Ryall J. (2020) Coronavirus: Doctors collapse from exhaustion as
    virus spreads through South Korea. 3 March 2020. The Telegraph.
    Available at:
    <https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2020/03/03/coronavirus-doctors-collapse-exhaustion-virus-spreads-south/>

[^34]: Taiwan Centers for Disease Control (2020) Taiwan timely
    identifies first imported case of 2019 novel coronavirus infection
    returning from Wuhan, China through onboard quarantine, 21 January
    2020. Available at: <https://www.cdc.gov.tw/En/Bulletin/Detail/pVg\_jRVvtHhp94C6GShRkQ?typeid=158>

[^35]: Taiwan Centers for Disease Control (2020) COVID-19 Update.
    Available at: <https://www.cdc.gov.tw/En>

[^36]: Sui C. (2020) What Taiwan can teach the world on fighting the
    coronavirus. NBC News, 10 March 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.nbcnews.com/health/health-news/what-taiwan-can-teach-world-fighting-coronavirus-n1153826>

[^37]: Chiou, C. (2020) How Taiwan Battles the Coronavirus. The
    Diplomat, 6 April 2020
    <https://thediplomat.com/2020/04/how-taiwan-battles-the-coronavirus/>

[^38]: Taiwan Centers for Disease Control (2020) Recommendations for
    COVID-19: Case Definition, Specimen Collection, and Diagnostic Tests,
    12 April 2020. Available at: <https://www.cdc.gov.tw/En/File/Get/r5dYouF4hPsyYAmt_mOkcQ>

[^39]: Taiwan Healthcare (2020) Taiwanese Genome Researchers just
    Developed a Rapid 15-minute COVID-19 Diagnostic Testing, 9 March
    2020. Available at: <https://www.taiwan-healthcare.org/biob2b/breaking-news?articleSysid=BhsArticle20200310105046123664253&articleTypeSysid=A>

[^40]: Focus Taiwan (2020) Taiwan, Denmark jointly develop 12-minute
    COVID-19 test kit, 8 April 2020. Available at: <https://focustaiwan.tw/sci-tech/202004080025>

[^41]: Wang C., Ng C. and Brook R. (2020). Response to COVID-19 in
    Taiwan: Big Data Analytics, New Technology, and Proactive Testing.
    JAMA. 323, 14:1341-1342. (doi:[10.1001/jama.2020.3151](http://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.3151)

[^42]: Tech UK (2020) How Taiwan used tech to fight covid 19, 31 March
    2020. Available at:

    https://www.techuk.org/insights/news/item/17187-how-taiwan-used-tech-to-fight-covid-19

[^43]: Bennett D. (2020) From phone-tracking to drive-thru testing: How
    Taiwan and Korea are crushing the COVID-19 crisis. ABS-CBN, 21 March
    2020. Available at:
    https://news.abs-cbn.com/ancx/culture/spotlight/03/21/20/from-phone-tracking-to-drive-thru-testing-how-taiwan-and-korea-are-crushing-the-covid-19-crisis

[^44]: Kluth, A. (2020) Taiwan offers the best model for coronavirus
    data sharing. Bloomberg, 22 April 2020. Available at:
    https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2020-04-22/taiwan-offers-the-best-model-for-coronavirus-data-tracking

[^45]: <span class="underline"> </span> Lin C, Braund WE, Auerbach J,
    Chou J-H, Teng J-H, Tu P, et al. (2020) Policy decisions and use of
    information technology to fight 2019 novel coronavirus disease,
    Taiwan. Emerg Infect Dis. (doi:
    [10.3201/eid2607.200574](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2607.200574))

[^46]: Ministry of Health, Government of Singapore (2020) Official
    Update of COVID -19 Situation in Singapore. 29 March 2020. Available
    at: [<span
    class="underline">https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/7e30edc490a5441a874f9efe67bd8b89</span>](https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/7e30edc490a5441a874f9efe67bd8b89)

[^47]: Singapore Ministry of Health (2020) Disease Outbreak Response
    System Condition, available at: https://www.moh.gov.sg/covid-19

[^48]: Fisher, D. (2020) Why Singapore’s coronavirus response worked –
    and what we can all learn. The Conversation. 18 March 2020.
    Available at:
    https://theconversation.com/why-singapores-coronavirus-response-worked-and-what-we-can-all-learn-134024

[^49]: Lin, RJ., Lee, TH. And Lye, DCB (2020) Preprint: From SARS to
    COVID-19: the Singapore journey. Medical Journey of Australia, 6
    April 2020, available at:
    <https://www.mja.com.au/journal/2020/sars-covid-19-singapore-journey>

[^50]: Teo YY. (2020) A systems-level approach to COVID-19 outbreak in
    Singapore. Usher Institute COVID-19 Webinar Series. 26 March 2020.
    Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wNXvJ1v1\_CU

[^51]: Ministry of Health, Government of Singapore (2020) Help speed up
    contact tracing with TraceTogether. 21 March 2020. Available at:
    https://www.gov.sg/article/help-speed-up-contact-tracing-with-tracetogether

[^52]: Hsu, L and Tan, M. (2020) What Singapore can teach the U.S. about
    responding to COVID-19. Stat News. 23 March 2020. Available at:
    https://www.statnews.com/2020/03/23/singapore-teach-united-states-about-covid-19-response/

[^53]: Ministry of Health, Government of Singapore (2020) Help speed up
    contact tracing with TraceTogether. 21 March 2020. Available at:
    https://www.gov.sg/article/help-speed-up-contact-tracing-with-tracetogether

[^54]: The Guardian (2020) Singapore outbreak surges with 3000 cases in
    three days, 21 April 2020. Available at:
    https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/21/singapore-coronavirus-outbreak-surges-with-3000-new-cases-in-three-days

[^55]: Asia Unbound (2020) Singapore and COVID-19: Strengths, Shifts,
    and Limits of National Response, 21 April 2020, available at:
    https://www.cfr.org/blog/singapore-and-covid-19-strengths-shifts-and-limits-national-response

[^56]: [Ministry of Health New Zealand (2020) COVID-19 - current cases.
    Available at: <span
    class="underline">https://www.health.govt.nz/our-work/diseases-and-conditions/covid-19-novel-coronavirus/covid-19-current-situation/covid-19-current-cases</span>](https://www.health.govt.nz/our-work/diseases-and-conditions/covid-19-novel-coronavirus/covid-19-current-situation/covid-19-current-cases)

[^57]: Government of New Zealand (2020) Prime Minister’s remarks on
    COVID-19 alert level decision, 20 April 2020. Available at:
    https://www.beehive.govt.nz/speech/prime-minister%E2%80%99s-remarks-covid-19-alert-level-decision-%E2%80%93-april-20

[^58]: Hayward, M. and Lines-MacKenzie, J. (2020) Coronavirus: Wider
    COVID-19 testing starts in Christchurch, Waikato, Stuff.co.uk, 17
    April 2020. Available at:
    https://www.stuff.co.nz/national/health/coronavirus/121074955/coronavirus-wider-covid19-testing-starts-in-christchurch-community

[^59]: Ministry of Health, New Zealand (2020) Rapid Audit of Contact
    Tracing for COVID-19 in New Zealand, 10 April 2020. Available at:
    [<span
    class="underline">https://www.health.govt.nz/system/files/documents/publications/contact\_tracing\_report\_verrall.pdf</span>](https://www.health.govt.nz/system/files/documents/publications/contact_tracing_report_verrall.pdf)

[^60]: RNZ (2020) COVID-19: New Zealand contact tracing app due within
    two weeks, 27 April 2020, Available at:
    https://www.rnz.co.nz/news/national/415214/covid-19-new-zealand-contact-tracing-app-due-within-two-weeks

[^61]: Government of New Zealand (2020) Staying at Home and
    Self-isolation guidance, available at:
    https://covid19.govt.nz/individuals-and-households/health-and-wellbeing/staying-at-home-and-self-isolation/\#self-isolation-advice-if-you%E2%80%99re-unwell

[^62]: Brockett, M. (2020) New Zealand seeks to wipe out virus after
    early lockdown success, Bloomberg, 16 April 2020. Available at:
    https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-04-16/new-zealand-seeks-to-wipe-out-virus-after-early-lockdown-success

[^63]: BBC (2020) Coronavirus: How New Zealand relied on science and
    empathy, 16 April 2020. Available at:
    https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-52344299

[^64]: Tómas, R. (2020) First Confirmed COVID-19 Case in Iceland,
    Iceland Review, 28 February 2020. Available at:
    ttps://www.icelandreview.com/news/first-confirmed-covid-19-case-in-iceland/

[^65]: Gudbjartsson, D., Helgason, A., Jonsson, H., Magnusson, O.,
    Melsted, P., Norddahl, G., Saemundsdottir, J., Sigurdsson, A.,
    Sulem, P., and Agustsdottir, A., Eiriksdottir, B., Fridriksdottir,
    R., Gardarsdottir, E., Georgsson, G., Gretarsdottir, O.,
    Gudmundsson, K., Gunnarsdottir, T., Gylfason, A., Holm, H., Jensson,
    B., Jonasdottir, A., Jonsson, F., Josefsdottir, K., Kristjansson,
    T., Magnusdottir, D., le Roux, L., Sigmundsdottir, G.,
    Sveinbjornsson, G. Sveinsdottir, K., Sveinsdottir, M., Thorarensen,
    E., Thorbjornsson, B., Löve, A., Masson, G., Jonsdottir, I., Möller,
    A., Gudnason, T., Kristinsson, K., Thorsteinsdottir, U. and
    Stefansson, K. (2020) Spread of SARS-CoV-2 in the Icelandic
    Population, New England Journal of Medicine (doi: 1[<span
    class="underline">0.1056/NEJMoa2006100</span>](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa2006100))

[^66]: Government of Iceland Directorate of Health (2020) COVID-19 in
    Iceland - Statistics, available at https://www.covid.is/data

[^67]: John, T. (2020) Iceland lab's testing suggests 50% of coronavirus
    cases have no symptoms, CNN, 3 April 2020, Available at:
    https://edition.cnn.com/2020/04/01/europe/iceland-testing-coronavirus-intl/index.html

[^68]: Hjelmgaard, K. (2020) Iceland has tested more of its population
    for coronavirus than anywhere else. Here's what it learned, USA
    Today, 11 April 2020, available at:
    https://eu.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2020/04/10/coronavirus-covid-19-small-nations-iceland-big-data/2959797001/

[^69]: Clifford, M. (2020) Coronavirus: 'Test, trace, isolate' - Iceland
    PM says strict strategy has controlled outbreak, Sky News, 27 April
    2020, available at:
    https://news.sky.com/story/coronavirus-test-trace-isolate-iceland-pm-says-strict-strategy-has-controlled-outbreak-11979125

[^70]: Logadóttir, F. (2020) An infection tracking app goes live on
    April 1st, Frettabladid, 31 March 2020, available at:
    https://www.frettabladid.is/frettir/smitrakningarapp-fer-i-loftid-fyrsta-april/

[^71]: <span class="underline">Gjudbarsson et al (n115)</span>

[^72]: Ćirić, J. (2020) Iceland Slows COVID-19 Testing Due to Shortage
    of Swabs, Iceland Review, 23 March 2020, available at:
    https://www.icelandreview.com/society/iceland-slows-covid-19-testing-due-to-shortage-of-swabs/
