---
title: 'Management of Nosocomial (Hospital-Acquired) Infections of SARS-CoV2'
date: 2020-07-06 00:00:00 Z
subtitle: A Scoping Review of UK government Guidelines and Practice and International
  approaches
layout: addendum
authors:
- given: Genevie
  family: Fernandes
  institute: 
  url: "/people/genevie-fernandes.html"
ref: TD2
report: NOS
abstract: 
---

1. [Background](#1-background)
2. [Summary](#2-summary)
    * [What are the guidelines and practices in the UK?](#what-are-the-guidelines-and-practices-in-the-uk)
    * [What are the approaches followed by other countries?](#what-are-the-approaches-followed-by-other-countries)
3. [UK government’s COVID-19 Infection Prevention and Control Guidelines](#3-uk-governments-covid-19-infection-prevention-and-control-guidelines)
4. [SARS-CoV-2 Infection prevention and control measures in South Korea, Singapore, New Zealand, Ireland and Australia 22](#4-sars-cov-2-infection-prevention-and-control-measures-in-south-korea-singapore-new-zealand-ireland-and-australia)
    * [South Korea](#south-korea)
    * [Singapore](#singapore)
    * [New Zealand](#new-zealand)
    * [Ireland](#ireland)
    * [Australia](#australia)
    * [Italy](#italy)
    * [Germany](#germany)
    * [Denmark](#denmark)
    * [Sweden](#sweden)
    * [Norway](#norway)
    * [CASES: Two hospitals that have prevented nosocomial SARS-CoV-2 infections among health workers and patients](#cases-two-hospitals-that-have-prevented-nosocomial-sars-cov-2-infections-among-health-workers-and-patients)
5. [Footnotes and References](#5-footnotes-and-references)


## 1. Background

The risk of nosocomial transmission of SARS-CoV 2 has made health
workers around the world extremely vulnerable to infection and
mortality. While there are no formal estimates of nosocomial
transmission of SARS-CoV-2, high infection rates among health-care
workers (HCWs) highlights just how widespread this problem is globally
as well as in the UK. Based on data from 30 countries from national
nursing associations, government figures and media reports, the
International Council of Nurses has reported that at least 90,000
health-care workers worldwide are believed to have been infected with
SARS-CoV 2.[^56] In early May, UK government figures[^57] reported an
infection rate of 4.8% among health, social care and essential workers
and their households. However, Henegan and colleagues estimated that
30.5% of all infected cases on the 16th of April were related to
healthcare workers, and also discussing the difficulty in gaining
accurate estimates of infection rates among health workers alone.[^58]
As of April 22, Cook and colleagues reported that a total of 116 NHS
staff had died from SARS-CoV 2; and 63% of the cases were of the BAME
communities.[^59]

Figures from China’s National Health Commission show that more than 3300
health-care workers (4% of the 81,285 reported infections) have been
infected as of early March.[^60] Other reports from China have reported
an infection rate of 2.09-29% among healthcare workers.[^61][^62][^63]
In May, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control reported
that 20% of SARS-CoV 2 cases in Spain are healthcare workers, compared
with 10% in Italy as a whole (in the hard-hit region of Lombardy the
percentage rises to 20%). In Germany, as of May 16, 11,780 cases with a
SARS-CoV-2 infection have been notified among staff working in medical
facilities (6.7% of total cases i.e. 173,772).[^64] In the United
States, infected healthcare workers represent 11% of total cases.[^65]

The nosocomial route of transmission amplifies infections among health
workers as well as patients coming to hospital settings for other
medical reasons, thus making infection control and management practices
a critical component of a government’s response for containing SARS-CoV
2. This report provides a scoping review of how countries have prevented
and managed nosocomial SARS-CoV 2 infections. This review covered 11
countries including the UK, South Korea, Singapore, New Zealand,
Ireland, Australia, Germany, Italy, Denmark, Sweden, and Norway, and
relied on guidelines from government websites, peer-reviewed articles
and news media reports.

## 2. Summary

### What are the guidelines and practices in the UK? 

See [Section 3](#3-uk-governments-covid-19-infection-prevention-and-control-guidelines) for detailed guidelines and references.

-   **Point of entry:** Symptomatic individuals or those suspected with
    SARS-CoV-2 symptoms must contact the NHS via a helpline or online
    for advice on hospital admission. At the point of entry, patients
    must be identified as asymptomatic, symptomatic for COVID-19 or
    COVID+. All patients should be tested on emergency admission.

-   **Separation among zones of risk:** Guidelines state that patients
    with suspected/possible COVID-19 need to be segregated, especially
    in admission/waiting and non-COVID areas. Confirmed/suspected cases
    must be isolated in separate room or a COVID+ cohorted area. Several
    NHS hospitals have divided their facility into two zones: (i)
    SARS-CoV-2 (positive and suspected cases) and (ii) Non-SARS-CoV-2.

-   **Use of masks:** Guidelines state that symptomatic patients may
    wear masks, but this is not mandated. From 2 April, all healthcare
    facilities were recommended to wear masks for all contact with all
    patients and symptomatic patients were recommended to wear masks if
    able to do so. As of 15 June, all healthcare workers will have to
    wear surgical masks in all areas of the hospital while visitors will
    have to wear face coverings at all times.

-   **Personal protective equipment (PPE):** Healthcare workers are recommended to
    wear PPE including gloves, disposable apron or gown (based on risk
    assessment), surgical masks or fluid resistant mask or filtering
    face piece respirator (based on risk of procedure i.e. aerosol
    generating procedures) and face and eye protection. It is important
    to note, that when providing care to any individuals in the
    extremely vulnerable group undergoing shielding, HCWs have to wear
    gloves, disposable plastic apron and surgical mask.

-   **Teams:** It is recommended that when there are sufficient levels
    of staff, a dedicated team of staff should be assigned to care for
    patients in isolation/cohort rooms/areas and there should be efforts
    to reduce staff movement between pathways for SARS-CoV-2 and
    non-SARS-CoV-2.

-   **Testing for HCWs:** Symptomatic HCWs need to inform their employer
    and can get tested within the first three days of the onset of
    symptoms. If test result is negative, staff can resume patient care.
    On a positive test result, staff can resume patient care after 7
    days if symptoms have resolved. While guidelines recommend the
    testing of asymptomatic staff based on available capacity, NHS
    hospitals[^66] (Newcastle Upon Tyne, Sheffield, Cambridge, Imperial
    and Barts Health NHS Trust London) have started testing asymptomatic
    staff, part of pilot studies.

-   **Testing for patients:** Between 17<sup>th</sup> March and
    15<sup>th</sup> April, around 25,000 people were discharged from
    hospitals into care homes. Due to government policy at the time, not
    all patients were tested for COVID-19 before discharge, with
    priority given to patients with symptoms.[^67] [^68] On 15 April,
    the policy was changed to test all those being discharged into care
    homes and all elective admissions.

-   **Visitors:** Visiting may be suspended if considered appropriate
    depending on local circumstances and risk assessment. Also, visitors
    with symptoms cannot enter the hospital.

-   **Non-SARS-CoV-2 services:** All opportunities for remote,
    multi-professional virtual consultations must be maximised. On 27
    April, the government announced that the “restoration of other NHS
    services” will start from 28 April on a “hospital-by-hospital”
    basis. As of 14 May, NHS England stated that ‘over the coming weeks
    patients who need important planned procedures – including surgery –
    will begin to be scheduled for that care, with specialists
    prioritising those with the most urgent clinical need.

### What are the approaches followed by other countries? 

See [Section 4](#4-sars-cov-2-infection-prevention-and-control-measures-in-south-korea-singapore-new-zealand-ireland-and-australia) for detailed guidelines and references.

Countries use an ecosystem of measures to prevent and manage SARS-CoV 2
infections among patients and healthcare workers in the hospital
setting. All patients are screened at the point of entry and then
suspected cases with respiratory symptoms are allocated to separate
wards and clinics, in separate locations, with separate teams. In
countries such as South Korea, Singapore, Denmark, and recently Italy,
individuals are screened through community based testing and primary
healthcare staff (GPs) and only then sent to hospitals if presenting
with severe symptoms, thereby reducing the burden on staff for initial
triage at the point of entry. In Ireland, symptomatic patients are
screened in a triage tent at the entrance of the emergency department.
Patients have to wear surgical masks, and health-care workers have to
wear personal protective equipment based on the risk level of patient
interaction. Disinfecting areas for reducing environmental transmission
and physical distancing measures are observed. Visitors and caregivers
are restricted entry to hospitals in most countries. Finally, health
staff are encouraged to shift to virtual channels like telephone or
video consultations for other non-COVID-19 services as much as possible.

Countries have adopted several measures to reduce the risk of infection
among HCW.

-   Personal protective equipment (PPE): PPE is commonly recommended
    across all the reviewed countries. All HCWs have to wear surgical
    masks during patient interactions, and then based on the risk level
    of the task around patient care (i.e. routine care or aerosol
    generating procedures), they have to put on a lower or higher level
    of PPE. While donning appropriate levels of PPE is a universally
    recommended measure, reports from Italy and Spain,[^69] highlighted
    the shortages in PPE which has affected healthcare workers.

-   Organisational practices: Some countries follow organisational
    practices such as allocating designated and small teams for treating
    COVID-19 and non COVID-19 patients. This practice prevents
    cross-integration of staff between clean and infected wards, and
    with small dedicated teams it also becomes easy to do contact
    tracing if members get infected. In South Korea’s Samsung Medical
    Centre,[^70] COVID-19 units are staffed by only dedicated core
    clinical teams with special training who live in hospital
    accommodations during two-week shifts and then are quarantined for
    one week and only allowed to return to the care of non COVID-19
    patients after a negative COVID-19 test.

-   Testing: All the countries provided testing for HCWs on presentation
    of SARS-CoV2 symptoms. For HCWs in Singapore, temperature is
    monitored twice every day and with any increase in temperature, HCWs
    are evaluated for testing. While Italy and Norway require HCWs to
    present with severe symptoms for testing, other countries tested
    even with mild symptoms. Testing alone is not enough. It is also
    important to ensure that HCWs are quarantined or allowed to rest
    well before they resume patient care. Countries follow different
    strategies after a HCW tests positive. In Singapore,[^71] when
    someone (health-care worker, staff or patient) in the hospital tests
    positive, response teams trace every contact and then quarantine
    only those who had close contact with the infected person, and close
    contact is defined as spending 30 minutes at a distance of less than
    six feet and without the use of a surgical mask. If the exposure is
    shorter than the prescribed limit but within six feet for more than
    two minutes, workers can stay on the job if they wear a surgical
    mask and have twice-daily temperature checks. People who have had
    brief, incidental contact are just asked to monitor themselves for
    symptoms. In Germany,[^72] if HCWs have SARS-CoV2, they cannot care
    for patients and can resume work only after 48 hours of being free
    from symptoms and after negative PCR from 2 simultaneous oro- and
    nasopharyngeal swabs. As of mid-May, Vietnam,[^73] has started
    conducting weekly testing for all its HCWs in the hospital setting.

Support mechanisms: Singapore and Denmark have set up peer support
networks and psychological interventions for its HCW to address the
physical fatigue and psychological stress of donning PPE and working in
COVID-19 shifts. ‌

While all the countries have infection control and management guidelines
in place, the key differentiating factor between countries that have
successfully managed to prevent and control nosocomial infections (such
as South Korea and Singapore) and those that have had high rates of
infections in HCWs (such as Italy) is the early response in testing and
stratifying patients thereby reducing the burden at the hospital level.
South Korea[^74] conducts widespread testing in the community regardless
of presentation of symptoms, thereby identifying asymptomatic, mild and
moderate cases. COVID-19 management teams then stratify confirmed cases
based on the level of their symptoms, with mild cases asked to
self-isolate at home along with daily monitoring of symptoms, and other
mild cases directed to community facilities, and severe and critical
patients sent to hospitals (see figure 1). With such an organised
response, hospital staff are well prepared for the incoming cases. While
early testing and contact tracing reduces the burden of patients in the
hospital, measures such as providing telehealth consultations for other
medical areas and restricting visitors prevents overcrowding and enables
effective management in this setting.

<img src="/diagrams/nos/image4.png" style="width:100%" />

*Figure 1.* Stratification of hospital/room assignments for SARS-CoV2 in
South Korea[^74]


Overall, a major lesson that emerges is that while infection control
guidelines have to be followed in hospital settings, other response
measures are equally important to enable the effective implementation of
these guidelines. These measures include (i) the need for preparedness
(hospitals in Singapore and South Korea conduct pandemic drills and
ensure that staff are well trained for such eventualities), (ii)
financing public healthcare systems (investments in infrastructure and
workforce), (iii) a coordinated response between federal and provincial
governments (especially for procurement, stockpiling and ensuring timely
PPE, ventilators and other materials), (iv) protection of HCWs (through
training, PPE, testing, PPE, and support), (v) community surveillance
through early and widespread testing and contact tracing, and (vi) use
of virtual channels to provided non COVID-19 services during the
outbreak.

## 3. UK government’s COVID-19 Infection Prevention and Control Guidelines

#### Point of entry

Symptomatic individuals are advised to consult NHS Inform online and
phone 111 as the first point of contact,[^76] not their GP.[^77] In the
case of any emergency admissions in the hospital, patients must be
immediately identified as either i) asymptomatic; ii) symptomatic for
COVID-19; iii) COVID+.[^78]

#### Use of face mask

National guidelines recommend that symptomatic patients may wear a
surgical face mask in clinical areas, common waiting areas or during
transportation and where tolerable and appropriate.[^79] As of 15 June,
all hospital staff in England will be expected to wear surgical masks,
while all visitors and outpatients will be expected to wear face
coverings at all times.[^80]

#### Hand hygiene

All staff, patients and visitors should decontaminate their hands with
alcohol-based hand rub when entering and leaving areas where patient
care is being delivered. Hand hygiene must be performed immediately
before every episode of direct patientcare and after any activity/task
or contact that potentially results in hands becoming contaminated,
including the removal of PPE, equipment decontamination and waste
handling.[^25]

#### Separation among zones of risk

Patients with suspected/possible COVID-19 need to be segregated,
especially in admission/waiting and non-COVID areas. Any patient who
subsequently tests positive or shows symptoms can be immediately
isolated or managed in a COVID+ cohorted area.[^26] Hospitals
across the country have been divided into zones to separate patients
most likely infected with COVID-19 from those with other health
problems.

#### Patient placement

**Single rooms:** Wherever possible, patients with possible or confirmed
COVID-19 should be placed in single rooms. Where single/isolation rooms
are in short supply, and cohorting is not yet considered possible
(patient(s) awaiting laboratory confirmation), patients who have
excessive cough and sputum production should be prioritised for
single/isolation room placement. Single rooms in COVID-19 segregated
areas should, wherever possible, be reserved for performing aerosol
generating procedures (AGPs).

**Cohorting:** If a single/isolation room is not available, cohort
possible or confirmed respiratory infected patients with other patients
with possible or confirmed COVID-19. Use privacy curtains between the
beds to minimise opportunities for close contact. Where possible, a
designated self-contained area or wing of the healthcare facility should
be used for the treatment and care of patients with COVID-19.

**Negative pressure rooms:** Special environmental controls, such as
negative pressure isolation rooms, are not necessary to prevent the
transmission of COVID-19. However, in the early stages where capacity
allows, and in high risk settings, patients with possible or confirmed
COVID-19 may be isolated in negative pressure rooms. Patients with
suspected/confirmed COVID-19 should not be placed in positive pressure
rooms.

#### Personal protective equipment (PPE)[^81]

Conducting an aerosol generating procedure (AGP) on a possible/confirmed
case outside a higher risk acute care area.

-   Single use gloves

-   Single use disposable fluid-repellent coverall/gown

-   Single use filtering face piece respirator

-   Single use eye/face protection (visor/goggles)

Working with a possible/confirmed case in higher risk acute care area

-   Single use gloves

-   Single use disposable plastic apron (sessional use full gowns for OT
    and labour wards)

-   Sessional use filtering face piece respirator

-   Sessional use eye/face protection (visor/goggles)

Working with a possible/confirmed case in other inpatient areas (other
than higher risk acute areas), operating theatres and labour wards (no
AGPs) and transferring patients

-   Single use

-   Single use disposable plastic apron

-   Single or sessional use fluid resistant surgical mask (risk assess)

-   Single or sessional eye/face protection (visor/goggles) (risk
    assess)

Providing inpatient care to any individual in the extremely vulnerable
group undergoing shielding

-   Single use gloves

-   Single use disposable plastic apron

-   Single use surgical mask

Higher risk acute areas include ICU/HDUs; ED resuscitation areas;
wards with non-invasive ventilation; operating theatres; endoscopy units
for upper Respiratory, ENT or upper GI endoscopy; and other clinical
areas where AGPs are regularly performed.

#### Testing

*Staff*

Symptomatic staff: If a member of staff develops symptoms of COVID-19
they should follow the stay at home guidance, and get tested as soon as
possible. Staff should first tell their employer and then be tested in
the first three days of the onset of symptoms - testing should not be
undertaken after day five of symptoms. Those eligible for a test will be
directed to the most appropriate place for testing including a local
acute, mental health and community hospital trust/ local community
venues/outreach testing centres.[^82] If the result is negative, the
advice from Public Health England states that staff “can return to work
when they are medically fit to do so, following discussion with their
line manager and appropriate local risk assessment. Interpret negative
results with caution together with clinical assessment.” If staff test
positive for COVID-19, they can return to work after seven days, unless
they still have symptoms other than a cough or loss of sense of
smell/taste, in which case they must continue to self-isolate until they
feel better.

Asymptomatic staff: Guidelines[^25] state that ‘additional
available NHS testing capacity should be used to routinely and
strategically test asymptomatic frontline staff as part of infection
prevention and control measures. Local health systems should work
together with their labs and regions to agree the use of available
capacity.’

*Patients*

**Emergency admissions**: All patients should be tested on admission.
For patients who test negative, a further single re-test should be
conducted between 5-7 days after admission.

**Elective admissions (including day surgery):** Patients should isolate
for 14 days prior to admission along with members of their household. As
and when feasible, this should be supplemented with a pre-admission test
(conducted a maximum of 72 hours in advance), allowing patients who test
negative to be admitted with IPC and PPE requirements that are
appropriate for someone who’s confirmed COVID status is negative.

**Inpatients:** Any inpatient who becomes symptomatic, who has not
previously tested positive, should be immediately tested as per current
practice.

**Other day interventions:** Testing and isolation to be determined
locally, based on patient and procedural risk.

**Discharge:** All patients being discharged to a care home or a hospice
should be tested up to 48 hours prior to discharge.

#### Team composition<sup>26</sup>

When there are sufficient levels of staff, a dedicated team of staff
should be assigned to care for patients in isolation/cohort rooms/areas.
Maintaining consistency in staff allocation where possible and reducing
movement of staff between different pathways.

#### Visitors[^26]

Visitors with COVID-19 symptoms must not enter the healthcare facility.
Visitors who are symptomatic should be encouraged to leave and must not
be permitted to enter areas where there are extremely vulnerable
patients. Visiting may be suspended if considered appropriate depending
on local circumstances and risk assessment. For e.g. Plymouth Hospitals
Trust**.** has suspended visitors in its red and amber zones (suspected
and confirmed cases of COVID-19). All visitors entering a
segregated/cohort area must be instructed on hand hygiene. They must not
visit any other care area. Limiting entry points to a facility will help
manage local restrictions.

#### Environmental decontamination

The main patient isolation room should be cleaned at least twice daily.
Body fluid spills should be decontaminated promptly. Patient isolation
rooms, cohort areas and clinical rooms must be decontaminated at least
daily. Clinical rooms should also be decontaminated after clinical
sessions for patients with possible/known pandemic COVID-19. Rooms/areas
where PPE is removed must be decontaminated, ideally timed to coincide
with periods immediately after PPE removal by groups of staff (at least
twice daily). The increased frequency of decontamination/cleaning should
be incorporated into the environmental decontamination schedules for all
areas, including where there may be higher environmental contamination
rates. Opportunities for cleaning of frequently touched surfaces
multiple times (more than twice a day wherever possible) should be
taken.

#### Non COVID-19 services

On 27 April, the government announced that the “restoration of other NHS
services” will start from 28 April on a “hospital-by-hospital” basis. As
of 14 May, NHS England stated that ‘over the coming weeks patients who
need important planned procedures – including surgery – will begin to be
scheduled for that care, with specialists prioritising those with the
most urgent clinical need.[^83]

In terms of planned and elective care, only patients who remain
asymptomatic having isolated for 14 days prior to admission and, where
feasible, tested negative prior to admission, should be admitted. In
terms of outpatient services, only patients who are asymptomatic should
attend these services, ensuring they can comply with normal social
distancing requirements. Those requiring urgent and emergency care will
continue to be tested on arrival and streamed accordingly, with services
split to make the risk of picking up the virus in hospital as low as
possible. Those attending emergency departments and other ‘walk-in’
services will be required to maintain social distancing, with trusts
expected to make any adjustments necessary to allow this. Those
requiring a long hospital stay will be continuously monitored for
symptoms and re-tested between 5 and 7 days after admission, and those
who are due to be discharged to a care home will be tested up to 48
hours before they are due to leave. Independent hospitals have been
given the go-ahead to resume some private and elective surgery after NHS
England triggered a ‘de-escalation’ clause in the historic contract
signed with the sector in March to help tackle the COVID-19
pandemic.[^84] All opportunities for remote, multi-professional virtual
consultations must be maximised. Most GP surgeries now offer online and
video consultations.[^85]

## 4. SARS-CoV-2 Infection prevention and control measures in South Korea, Singapore, New Zealand, Ireland and Australia

### South Korea[^86]

#### Point of entry

Triage is strengthened at the first point of entry to the emergency room
at the hospital entrance for early case detection through measures like
checklists. Checklists for patients with febrile respiratory symptoms,
travel history or contact status with confirmed COVID-19 cases are
prepared and circulated among HCW.

#### Patient placement

Patients with febrile respiratory symptoms are immediately placed in an
isolated, negative pressure room. Suspected patients with febrile
respiratory symptoms are separated from other patients even in the
absence of symptoms.

#### Treatment response for suspected and confirmed patients

Critical care physicians wearing PPE take detailed history of patients
with febrile respiratory symptoms, including contact with COVID-19 cases
or travel history.

#### Treatment response for suspected and confirmed patients

Individuals with negative results and no evidence of pneumonia are
transferred from the emergency room to cohort wards if they were stable,
or to the cohort area of the ICU if they were unstable. In the case of
evidence of atypical pneumonia and negative PCR results, individuals are
transferred from the emergency room to a negative-pressure isolation
room, and PCR tests are performed repeatedly.

#### Reducing the risk of infection among healthcare workers

PPE, testing and daily monitoring of temperature are the three major
practices followed for reducing the risk of infection among HCWs. Staff
in charge of high-suspect COVID-19 cases, wear PPE, which includes N95
masks, face shields or goggles, long-sleeved gowns and gloves, and those
performing aerosol-generating procedures. HCWs are regularly checked for
their temperature and respiratory symptoms, and have access to testing.

#### Infrastructure

The hospital is divided in three zones based on risk stratification.
First, the main hospital is maintained as the clean zone. Second, a
separate temporary building (the moderate risk zone) is used for
suspected COVID-19 cases, such as individuals with febrile respiratory
symptoms without an obvious epidemiological link. A third zone, a
separate area in the emergency department (high-risk zone) is used for
patients at high risk of COVID-19 infection, such as individuals with
febrile respiratory syndromes and a history of contact with confirmed
cases of COVID-19.

#### Visitors and caregivers

The number of patient visitors and caregivers restricted; and all are
required to adhere to personal hand hygiene standards and are given
surgical masks to wear when visiting patients or healthcare workers.

### Singapore[^87]

#### Patient placement

Patients with COVID-19 are nursed in cohort rooms with three patients to
a room, spaced at least w2 m apart, and partitions were placed between
patient beds.

#### Reducing the risk of infection among healthcare workers

Healthcare teams are kept small and segregated by type of patients: (i)
suspect and confirmed cases of COVID-19 (ii) other patients. Teams are
also organised to ensure there are enough HCWs if the outbreak worsens,
and that they get enough rest. Cross-institution coverage by HCWs is
suspended.

Tasks are stratified by risk of infection. Highest risk tasks (airway
suctioning, intubation and bronchoscopy) warrant the donning of full
PPE, including eye protection, disposable gown, gloves, and either an
N95 mask or a powered air purifying respirator. Medium risk tasks, such
as triaging Emergency Department patients at first presentation for
fever and/or respiratory symptoms, requires a lower level of PPE.

Twice daily temperature monitoring of all HCWs is made mandatory. HCWs
whose logged temperature readings are higher than 37.5 degree Celsius
will be flagged up to the hospital's clinical epidemiology team for
further evaluation including testing.

Mealtimes for healthcare workers are staggered. Peer support programmes
address the physical fatigue and psychological stress from regular
donning and doffing of full PPE.

#### Physical distancing

In the general ward, shared communal facilities are closed, and patients
are limited to one visitor at any time. Common areas such as waiting
areas, pharmacies, patients are directed to keep 1m apart from one
another, using visual cues to guide waiting and queuing in both seated
and standing areas.

#### Visitors and caregivers

All visitors and outpatients undergo a questionnaire survey of travel
and contact history, as well as thermal scanning for fever before they
are allowed into the hospital premises.

Each inpatient is restricted to only 2 specified visitors through the
period of hospitalization. Similarly, each outpatient is only allowed 1
accompanying person when attending the specialist outpatient clinic. No
visitors are allowed in the respiratory surveillance ward.

#### Non-COVID-19 Medical Services

Didactic teaching and departmental meetings are conducted using video
conferencing. Medical students are withdrawn from clinical attachments.

### New Zealand[^88] [^88a]

#### Point of entry

Screening measures are in place for patients coming through to Emergency
Department to see if they are symptomatic; and if they are coming for a
respiratory illness then they go through a different pathway. Hospitals
have begun treating all respiratory infection as potential COVID-19
cases, and such patients are provided with a surgical mask upon entry to
the facility.

#### Patient placement

All patients who meet the case definition criteria for COVID-19 have to
wear a surgical mask and are encouraged to follow cough etiquette and
respiratory and hand hygiene. Cases under investigation, and probable
cases are accommodated in a single room. If confirmed, they can be
cohorted with other confirmed cases.

#### Treatment response for suspected and confirmed patients

Infection prevention and control precautions should apply for all
suspected and confirmed cases of COVID-19 and the patients should always
wear a surgical mask and followed respiratory and hand hygiene.

In addition to standard precautions, contact and droplet precautions
should be taken. When performing an aerosol generating procedure, apply
airborne precautions including the use of an airborne infection
isolation room (negative pressure room) where possible.

#### Reducing the risk of infection among healthcare workers

HCWs must wear PPE for contact and droplet precautions. PPE includes
long sleeve impervious gown, gloves, eye protection and surgical mask.
PPE for contact and airborne precautions include long sleeve impervious
gown, gloves, eye protection and particulate respirator (N95 mask).

General practitioners and healthcare workers with respiratory or
influenza-like symptoms who are in close contact with patients (ie, less
than 2 metres distance for more than 15 minutes) should be tested for
COVID-19 and other potential causes of their illness.

#### Infrastructure

In response to staff fears, on May 8, the Waitakere Hospital instituted
ward ‘bubbles’ segregating the hospital into different wards and
promoting no cross-institutional coverage by HCW.

#### Visitors and caregivers

Family/Whānau (extended family) must wear a surgical mask and practice
hand hygiene when supporting the patient during transfer to hospital and
whilst being assessed in the emergency department.

Hospital visits are limited and restricted. Allowances of visits are
determined by each district health board and are done so on a
case-by-case basis. Screening of visitors will be done, and visitors may
be refused entry. If approved, visits are done one-person at a time, are
booked in advance, and require precautions such as hand hygiene and
keeping a physical distance of 2 meters. When approved, visitors are
required to wear PPE provided by the DHB.

#### Non-COVID-19 Medical Services

Elective surgeries may be postponed or rearranged. General practices are
open, but appointments will be conducted online or by phone where
possible.

### Ireland[^89]

#### Patient placement

Patients with COVID-19 should be cared for in single rooms with en suite
facilities. They can also be cohorted together. Patients with suspected
COVID-19 should not be cohorted with those confirmed positive.

#### Treatment response for suspected and confirmed patients

HCWs should perform aerosol generating procedures on confirmed patients
in a negative pressure or neutral pressure room, ensuring that patients,
visitors and other healthcare settings are not exposed.

#### Reducing the risk of infection among healthcare workers

Designate small teams of HCWs caring for patients with possible or
confirmed COVID-19 and review this allocation regularly to ensure that
staff caring for COVID-19 patients do not care for patients without
COVID-19 during the same shift.

Surgical masks should be worn by all HCWs for all encounters, of 15
minutes or more, with other HCW in the workplace where a distance of 2m
cannot be maintained.

PPE for HCWs treating patients with COVID-19 include respiratory
protection (surgical mask), Gloves, Long-sleeved gown (for high contact
activities) /apron (for low contact activities), Eye protection as per
risk assessment\* (face shield or goggles) \*where there is a risk of
blood, body fluids, excretions or secretions (including respiratory
secretions) splashing into the eyes. PPE for conducting aerosol
generating procedures include PPE as above but an Filtering Face Piece 2
mask (rather than surgical mask) and long-sleeved gown.

At the start of each shift, all staff should be checked for symptoms of
viral respiratory infections, such as cough, fever, shortness of breath
or myalgia.If possible, designate extra catering support to staff
working in cohort areas to minimise their need to travel in the
facilities.

#### Physical distancing

Social interaction between HCWs who do not have to work together should
be avoided.

#### Visitors and caregivers

Restrictions will be required on visitors, but allowance of specific
scenarios such as compassionate and practical approach is required when
making this assessment.

In labour wards, birth partners in whom there is no clinical suspicion
of COVID-19 will be allowed to provide support to the mother in labour

When visiting patient's rooms, visitors are required to perform hand
hygiene and wear appropriate PPE.

#### Non-COVID-19 Medical Services

HCWs should try whenever possible to deliver care as remotely as
possible (sometimes through the use of mobile telephones).

### Australia[^90] [^90a] [^90b]

#### Point of entry

All patients go through risk assessment to determine the level of PPE
required if any. Patients with acute respiratory symptoms should wear
surgical mask upon presentation to hospital. Suspected, probable and
confirmed cases need to wear surgical masks.

#### Patient placement

Patients with acute respiratory symptoms must be placed in a single room
with door closed, or in a separated closed area designated for suspected
COVID-19 cases. Once the patient is isolated in a single room, they do
not need to continue wearing a mask.

#### Treatment response for suspected and confirmed patients

If aerosol generating procedures have to be performed, the patient
should be placed in a negative pressure room. For aerosol generating
procedures performed on patients who are NOT suspected or confirmed
cases of COVID-19, P2 respirators are not necessary, i.e., a surgical
mask is sufficient.

#### Reducing the risk of infection among healthcare workers

Healthcare workers with influenza-like illness should not work while
they are symptomatic. They should be tested for SARS-CoV-2 and undergo
isolation pending results. Healthcare workers who are defined as close
contacts should be treated as such.

When caring for patients (suspected and confirmed cases of COVID1-9),
the PPE requirements for HCW depends on the task (i.e. routine care and
aerosol generating procedures for patients with COVID-19) and setting
(ICU, Wards outside the ICU, and the Emergency department).

In settings where the loss of the healthcare worker will have a
significant impact on health services, an individual risk assessment
should be conducted in collaboration with the Public Health Unit.

#### Physical distancing

Physical distancing measures in clinics, and wards between health
workers and patients. Waiting room chairs are separated by greater than
1.5 meters. Direct communications between HCWs and patients conducted at
a distance where practical, and if not, HWs wear appropriate PPE

#### Visitors and caregivers

Visitors to hospitals should be limited and restricted to essential
circumstances. When entering hospitals, they should be trained and
supervised when using PPE.

In the labour ward requirements, women’s partner or other support person
may attend the delivery, but precautions are required to protect labour
ward staff, such as performing hand hygiene and putting on a surgical
mask when the individual is entering the hospital.

### Italy[^91] [^91a] [^92] [^93]

#### Point of entry
The first evaluation is done by telephone or e-mail. In case of symptoms
suggesting a possible COVID-19 infection, the patient is invited to stay
home, isolated from the rest of the family. The GP monitors the
evolution of the symptoms while avoiding as much direct contact as
possible with these patients. In case of respiratory distress, a special
hotline number has been set up to dispatch a team that can transfer the
patient to the hospital. In the hospitals, separate areas for patients
with COVID-19, are organised with a triage area equipped with mechanical
ventilation equipment.

#### Patient placement

Dedicated patient transport and isolation pathways. Patients with
respiratory symptoms, both suspected and confirmed cases tested and
allocated to the appropriate cohort. Cohort ICUs set up for COVID-19
patients (areas separated from the rest of the ICU beds to minimise risk
of in-hospital transmission).

#### Treatment response for suspected and confirmed COVID-19 patients

Isolated rooms with negative pressure to be identified for treatment of
patients with COVID-19. However, reports from Italy found that critical
care beds and negative pressure rooms ran out quickly in the first few
weeks of the outbreak, since hospitals were overloaded by patients with
acute respiratory failure, leading staff to use general wards with
natural ventilation as a makeshift remedy.

#### Hospital infrastructure

Since the end of February, the hospitals in Northern Italy have been
reorganised. Most of them have special areas for COVID-19 patients.
Operating rooms turned into makeshift ICUs to create surge capacity.
Hospitals have dedicated patient transport and isolation pathways.

#### Reducing the risk of infection among healthcare workers

HCWs have to wear appropriate PPE based on routine case and other
procedures for COVID-19 patients. One of the key safety restrictions is
that of appropriate filtering face piece (FFP) masks. FFP2, N95 and FFP3
masks are recommended for the management of COVID‐19 patients, but the
levels of protection for airway management in COVID‐19 patients adopted
in most of hospitals in Italy are either second‐ or third‐level PPE,
preferring the use of airborne‐level PPEs for critical care
aerosol‐generating procedures, including tracheal intubation,
bronchoscopy and ATI. So far, the outbreak‐related global PPE shortage
has forced the use of lower‐protection PPEs for aerosol‐generating
procedures.

Testing for HCWs is only available on display of severe symptoms.

#### Social distancing

Suspension of group activities and sharing of common spaces inside of
the structure.

#### Visitors

For the entire duration of the emergency, visitors including family and
acquaintances are prohibited from accessing the facility.

#### Other medical services

Cessation of elective surgery, semi-elective procedures postponed, with
only emergency, trauma and selected oncological surgery proceeding. Most
of the outpatient clinics have been closed and non-urgent visits are
postponed, to make resources available for the most severe cases.
Telemedicine consultations are being used for non-COVID-19 services
where possible.

### Germany[^94] [^95] [^96]

#### Point of entry

If possible, tests in the outpatient and pre-inpatient areas should be
carried out separately and if possible before further patient care /
treatment. The tests should preferably be carried out in designated
facilities outside of medical practices or outpatient clinics, which
ensure the separation of patients with respiratory symptoms and other
patients in order to be able to maintain regular care structures.

#### Patient placement

Cases, contacts and suspected cases of COVID-19, as well as non-cases,
should be treated in three spatially and personnel-separate areas:
COVID-19 area, suspected case area, NON-COVID-19 area. Patients with
COVID-19 should only be seen and cared for by dedicated personnel.

#### Treatment response for suspected and confirmed COVID-19 patients

Patients should preferably be treated in isolation rooms ideally with a
functional anteroom for donning and doffing PPE. As the
epidemic/pandemic progresses, isolation of patients in cohorts is
reasonable.

If SARS-CoV-2 is detected in patients or staff in an area that is not
intended for COVID-19 patients, immediate action must be taken. This
includes relocation of the case in the COVID1-9 area, use of mouse and
noise protection for staff, setting up of an outbreak team,
determination and allocating contacts to separate areas. Germany

#### Reducing the risk of infection among healthcare workers

General medical measures of wearing of medical mouth-nose protection by
staff in all areas with possible patient contact and especially contact
with patients with cold symptoms. In these situations, patients should
also be treated with medical mouth-nose protection. All other basic
hygiene measures must also be observed. Direct contact of all kinds
should be reduced in medical facilities.

Separation of personnel with strict assignment to individual areas in
which they should be allowed to treat either COVID-19 or non COVID-19
patients. Wherever possible, work should be carried out in permanent
teams, so that in the event of a new infection, as few contacts as
possible are available among the staff.

Testing and subsequent resuming of work for HCWs is based on whether
there is a relevant shortage of staff. 

In the first scenario, where there is no shortage, HCWs who have
symptoms can stay away from patient care and resume work after being
free from symptoms for 48 hours, with a test conducted if possible. In
this scenario, if HCWs have SARS-CoV2, then they cannot attend to
patients and can resume work only after 48 hours of being free from
symptoms and after negative PCR from 2 simultaneous oro- and
nasopharyngeal swabs. In the second scenario, where there is a shortage
of staff, HCWs with symptoms can give patient care but have to wear
mouth and nose protection at all times and test for SARS-CoV2. If the
test results are positive, then they can resume care for non-COVID-19
patients after being symptom-free for at least 48 hours and negative PCR
from 2 simultaneous oro- and nasopharyngeal swabs. The health status of
the staff should be regularly monitored and, if necessary, a diagnostic
clarification should be carried out. Employees with acute respiratory
diseases should stay at home.

#### Visitors

Restrictions to visits by family and friends. If permitted, visits
should be kept to a minimum and time limited. Protective measures are
required by visitors including: maintaining a distance of at least 1.5 m
from the patient, wearing protective gowns and close-fitting,
multi-layer mouth and nose protection as well as using hand sanitizer
when leaving the patient's room.

#### Other medical services

Even outside direct care of COVID-19 patients, the general wearing of
PPE for all staff in direct contact to particularly vulnerable patients.

### Denmark[^97] [^98]

#### Point of entry
People with mild respiratory symptoms who may suspect COVID-19 are
generally encouraged to stay home, as well as keep distance, and can
additionally by phone contact the GP and test for SARS-CoV-2 as
recommended.

When examining COVID-19 in a hospital, or in a special COVID-19 regional
assessment unit ('Fever clinic'), a clinical assessment of the patient,
including an assessment of symptoms, followed by testing as required.

#### Patient placement

Suspected COVID-19 patients are placed in a single room or behind room
separation that is visited only by designated and necessary staff.
Isolation can be done as cohort isolation, where patients with verified
same infectious disease and micro-organism gene type

#### Treatment response for suspected and confirmed COVID-19 patients

In direct patient contact, personnel should wear protective equipment in
the form of gloves, liquid-repellent, long-sleeved disposable coat,
surgical mask and visor / goggles. FFP2 or FFP3 mask is used in
high-risk procedures. Disposable equipment should be used as far as
possible for patient care.

If intensive treatment is needed, including mechanical ventilation
(respirator), this can be taken care of head of the team. Patients are
hospitalised in isolation and managed according to droplet infection
guidelines.

#### Hospital infrastructure

Separate COVID-19 cohort isolation wards have been set up using existing
wards, and the available number of intensive care beds have been
tripled.

#### Reducing the risk of infection among healthcare workers

Healthy employees as well as employees with symptoms that are not
compatible with COVID19 can go to work as normal. Upon presentation of
SARS-CoV2 like symptoms, employees should get tested, leave the
workplace immediately and cannot care for suspected or confirmed cases.
Employees can be tested for mild symptoms and can resume work after
negative test results. If employees test positive, then they can resume
patient care after 48 hours of being symptom-free. For employees at
high-risk, they must have been tested again 48 hours after symptom
cessation, and if negative, reassessment should be performed after
another 24 hours. If this test is also negative, the employee can resume
work. Consideration should be given to whether the recovered employee
can be relocated to a less sensitive work area, from becoming
symptom-free for 48 hours and until there are 2 x negative tests
available.

If a situation arises, where the test capacity does not match the need
for testing for SARS-CoV-2, testing must be prioritized to (i) patients
with moderate to severe symptoms who are hospitalised or are already
admitted in the hospital, (ii) employees who perform functions in
healthcare, the elderly, efforts for particularly vulnerable groups in
the social field, or in other very key functions in society, (iii)
citizens and employees of care centers, residences, closed institutions
and other settings where it can be difficult to ensure isolation,
distance, hygiene (iv) particularly vulnerable individuals.

In Nordsjællands Hospital, a 600-bed facility situated north of
Copenhagen, apart from PPE provision and creating new workflows,
healthcare workers are offered a psychological intervention to address
fear, anxiety and stress.

#### Other medical services

Hospital system will prioritise those who are critically ill – some
treatments will need to be postponed, such as non-emergency operations
and other major non-critical interventions. Fewer meetings in practices
or clinics. At risk patients should be offered telephone or video
consultations.

### Sweden[^99] [^100] [^101] [^102]

#### Point of entry
A triage tent is set up at the entrance of the hospital. Individuals
with no COVID-19 symptoms are sent directly to the emergency room or
home without entering the triage tent.

#### Patient placement

Suspected COVID-19 patients with no serious symptoms referred to
isolation with instructions on self-care. While suspected COVID-19
patients - with general symptoms, where emergency visits and possibly
in-patient care is necessary are allocated to a separate area in the
hospital.

#### Reducing the risk of infection among healthcare workers

The healthcare services in Sweden prioritise testing for hospitalised
patients and health or elderly care personnel with suspected COVID-19.

Despite the policy on testing HCW only symptoms, the Linköping
University hospital decided to test all staff in the department after
having had some patients with COVID-19. It turned out half (50) of the
staff tested positive for the coronavirus, and between five and ten of
them did not have any symptoms at all, or only a little headache or a
slight sniffle.

In the Karolinska University Hospital, HCWs have gone up to working 12.5
hours, splitting the day into two shifts instead of three.

#### Visitors

Visitors are restricted.

### Norway[^103] [^104]

#### Point of entry

Individuals with symptoms are encouraged to contact the GP as the first
point of contact.

#### Reducing the risk of infection among healthcare workers

The Norwegian Institute of Public Health recommends that tests for
health-care workers should be performed for SARS-CoV-2 on showing acute
respiratory tract infections with fever, cough or breathing
difficulties.

#### Visitors

Restrictions on visitors to all the country's health institutions and
the introduction of entry control.

#### Other medical services

E-consultation or video consultation options should be provided.

## CASES: Two hospitals that have prevented nosocomial SARS-CoV-2 infections among health workers and patients

#### Samsung Medical Centre in South Korea[^105]

Samsung Medical Center, a 2000-bed tertiary hospital in Seoul with 9,000
staff, has adopted a rigorous infection control strategy which has led
to zero infections in staff and secondary infections in patients as of
early May. All hospital visitors are thoroughly screened for risk of
SARS-CoV-2 with questionnaires, scanned with thermal cameras, and
required to wear masks prior to entering the building. Advanced
screening of patients and use of telemedicine limit unnecessary patient
encounters. Designated COVID-19 screening, treatment, and quarantine
areas are separated from the rest of the hospital. COVID-19 units are
staffed by only dedicated core clinical teams with special training who
live in hospital accommodations during two-week shifts and then are
quarantined for one week and only allowed to return to the care of non
COVID-19 patients after a negative COVID-19 test. Health staff wear full
body suits with powered air purifying respirators while caring for
COVID-19 patients, particularly for critically ill patients requiring
high-risk procedures. Strict social distancing is enforced throughout
the hospital, in particular the cafeteria, which is considered a
particularly high-risk area for disease transmission among staff. All
staff are required to wear surgical masks in the hospital, and N95 masks
are required when seeing any patient with respiratory symptoms and while
performing high-risk procedures regardless of the patient’s COVID-19
status.

#### Cotugno Hospital in Italy[^106]

The Cotugno Hospital, a specialist infectious diseases facility in
Naples, only treats COVID-19 patients, and has managed zero infections
among health staff as of April. Staff protection at the hospital goes
beyond standard WHO recommendations, as they wear thick waterproof suits
and those inside the treatment rooms with patients communicate through a
window to those outside. Medicines are passed through a compartment. The
ICU is divided into two zones. The first zone is a sub-intensive unit
with patients that are recovering or haven’t deteriorated, while the
second zone houses the critical patients, and different care teams are
allocated to these two zones. A red and white tape marks the line that
cannot be crossed. Clean area nurses and doctors assist infected area
staff across the line. They keep the two absolutely separate. Since this
is a specialist hospital that has been dealing with infectious diseases,
the staff are well trained and have the knowledge and experience of
implementing infection control measures including how to separate areas
and wear and remove PPE. It is important to note that since the COVID-19
outbreak first started in the north of Italy, this hospital had more
time to prepare for the emergency, and had more technological tools,
devices and trained staff that strictly followed protocols.

# 5. Footnotes and References

[^25]: SAGE (2020) Dynamic CO-CIN report to SAGE and NERVTAG (1 April
    2020). Available from:
    <https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/886424/s0096-co-cin-report-010420-sage22.pdf>

[^26]: Office for National Statistics (2020) Coronavirus (COVID-19)
    Infection Survey pilot: 5 June 2020: Office for National Statistics.
    Available from:
    <https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/coronaviruscovid19infectionsurveypilot/5june2020/pdf>

[^56]: Mantovani, C. (2020). Over 90,000 health workers infected with
    COVID-19 worldwide: nurses group. Reuters.
    [https://uk.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-nurses/over-90000-health-workers-infected-with-COVID-19-worldwide-nurses-group-idUKKBN22I1XH](https://uk.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-nurses/over-90000-health-workers-infected-with-covid-19-worldwide-nurses-group-idUKKBN22I1XH)

[^57]: Quinn, B. (2020). Number of key workers getting COVID-19
    overtakes positive tests in hospitals. The Guardian. Published on
    May 5,
    2020.[https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/may/05/number-of-key-workers-getting-COVID-19-overtakes-positive-tests-in-hospitals](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/may/05/number-of-key-workers-getting-covid-19-overtakes-positive-tests-in-hospitals)

[^58]: Henegan, C., Oke, J. and Jefferson, T. (2020) COVID-19: how many
    healthcare workers are infected? Centre for Evidence Based Medicine.
    Published on 17 April 2020. Available at:
    [https://www.cebm.net/COVID-19/COVID-19-how-many-healthcare-workers-are-infected/](https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/covid-19-how-many-healthcare-workers-are-infected/)

[^59]: Cook, T., Kursumovic, E, and Lennane, S. Exclusive: deaths of NHS
    staff from COVID-19 analysed. Health Services Journal. HSJ.
    Published on 22 April 2020.
    [https://www.hsj.co.uk/exclusive-deaths-of-nhs-staff-from-COVID-19-analysed/7027471.article](https://www.hsj.co.uk/exclusive-deaths-of-nhs-staff-from-covid-19-analysed/7027471.article)

[^60]: The Lancet (2020) COVID-19: protecting health-care workers. The
    Lancet, 2020. 395 (10228), p. 22. Available at:
    <https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(20)30644-9/fulltext>

[^61]: The Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia Emergency Response Epidemiology
    Team (2020) The epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of
    2019 novel coronavirus diseases (COVID-19) — China, 2020. China CDC
    Weekly, 2020. Available at:
    <http://weekly.chinacdc.cn/en/article/id/e53946e2-c6c4-41e9-9a9b-fea8db1a8f51>

[^62]: Wang D. et al. (2020). Clinical characteristics of 138
    hospitalized patients with 2019 Novel Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia
    in Wuhan, China. JAMA; doi:
    [10.1001/jama.2020.1585](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2761044)

[^63]: Guan W-J et al. (2020). Clinical characteristics of 2019 novel
    coronavirus infection in China. *New Engl J Med.* 2020 Feb 28; [doi:
    10.1056/NEJMoa2002032](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2002032)

[^64]: Robert Kock Institute (2020) Daily Situation Report. Published 16
    May 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.rki.de/DE/Content/InfAZ/N/Neuartiges_Coronavirus/Situationsberichte/2020-05-16-en.pdf?__blob=publicationFile>

[^65]: Jewett, C. and Szabo, L. (2020). Coronavirus is killing far more
    US health workers than official data suggests. The Guardian.
    Published April 15, 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2020/apr/15/coronavirus-us-health-care-worker-death-toll-higher-official-data-suggests>

[^66]: Hunter, E., Price, D., Murphy, E., et al. (2020) First experience
    of COVID-19 screening of health-care workers in England. Lancet
    2020; 395(10234):e77-e78; Keeley, A., Evans, C., Colton, H. et al.
    (2020) Roll-out of SARS-CoV-2 testing for healthcare workers at a
    large NHS Foundation Trust in the United Kingdom, March 2020. Euro
    Surveill. 2020;25(14):2000433; Treibel, T., Manisty, C., Burton, M.,
    McKnight, A., Lambourne, J., Augusto, J., Couto-Parada, X.,
    Cutino-Moguel, T., Noursadeghi, M., Moon, J. (2020) COVID-19: PCR
    screening of asymptomatic healthcare workers at London hospital.
    Lancet 2020; 395: 1608-1609; Rivett, L., Sridhar, S., Sparkes, D. et
    al (2020) Screening of healthcare workers for SARS-CoV-2 highlights
    the role of asymptomatic carriage in COVID-19 transmission. eLife
    2020;9:e58728; Klaber, B. (2020) Developing a COVID-19 testing
    strategy with local, national and global impact. Imperial College
    NHS Trust.
    [https://www.imperial.nhs.uk/about-us/blog/developing-a-COVID-19-testing-strategy](https://www.imperial.nhs.uk/about-us/blog/developing-a-covid-19-testing-strategy)

[^67]: National Audit Office (2020) Readying the NHS and adult social
    care in England for COVID-19. 12 June 2020. Available at:
    [https://www.nao.org.uk/report/readying-the-nhs-and-adult-social-care-in-england-for-COVID-19/](https://www.nao.org.uk/report/readying-the-nhs-and-adult-social-care-in-england-for-covid-19/)

[^68]: Department of Health and Social Care (2020) COVID-19: Our Action
    Plan for Adult Social Care. 15 April 2020. Available at:
    [https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment\_data/file/879639/COVID-19-adult-social-care-action-plan.pdf](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/879639/covid-19-adult-social-care-action-plan.pdf)

[^69]: Sirna, L., Muñoz Ratto, H., and Talmazan, Y. (2020). Medical
    workers in Spain and Italy 'overloaded' as more of them catch
    coronavirus. NBC news. Published on March 30.
    <https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/medical-workers-spain-italy-overloaded-more-them-catch-coronavirus-n1170721>

[^70]: Li, R. and Chung, D. (2020). The Role of Hospital Infection
    Control in Flattening The COVID-19 Curve: Lessons From South Korea.
    Health Affairs. Published on May 15.
    <https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hblog20200511.415767/full/>

[^71]: Gawande, A. (2020). Keeping the Coronavirus from Infecting
    Health-Care Workers. The New Yorker. Published March 21.
    <https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/keeping-the-coronavirus-from-infecting-health-care-workers>

[^72]: Robert Koch Institute. (2020). Guidelines for prevention and
    management of SARS-CoV2 in healthcare facilities.
    <https://www.rki.de/DE/Content/InfAZ/N/Neuartiges_Coronavirus/nCoV_node.html>

[^73]: Quang Thai P., (2020). Addressing COVID-19 in Vietnam: Progress
    to date and future priorities. Usher Institute Webinars. May 13 2020, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wibA34w8Xyo&feature=youtu.be>

[^74]: Her, M. (2020). Repurposing and reshaping of hospitals during the
    COVID-19 outbreak in South Korea. One Health 10 (2020) 100137. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.onehlt.2020.100137>

[^76]: NHS (2020) What to do if coronavirus symptoms get worse. 17 June 2020. Available at: <https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/coronavirus-covid-19/self-isolation-and-treatment/what-to-do-if-symptoms-get-worse/>

[^77]: Health Protection Scotland (2020) Novel coronavirus (COVID-19)
    Guidance for secondary care Management of possible/confirmed
    COVID-19patients presenting to secondary care. 29 May 2020.
    Available at: <https://hpspubsrepo.blob.core.windows.net/hps-website/nss/2936/documents/1_covid-19-guidance-for-secondary-care.pdf>

[^78]: NHS (2020) Operating framework for urgent and planned services in
    hospital settings during COVID-19. 14 May 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/wp-content/uploads/sites/52/2020/05/Operating-framework-for-urgent-and-planned-services-within-hospitals.pdf>

[^79]: Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC), Public Health Wales
    (PHW), Public Health Agency (PHA) Northern Ireland, Health
    Protection Scotland (HPS), Public Health Scotland, Public Health
    England and NHS England (2020) COVID-19: infection prevention and control guidance. 18 June 2020. Available at: <https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/886668/COVID-19_Infection_prevention_and_control_guidance_complete.pdf>

[^80]: Public Health England (2020) New government recommendations for
    England NHS hospital trusts and private hospital providers. 18 June 2020. Available at: <https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/wuhan-novel-coronavirus-infection-prevention-and-control/new-government-recommendations-for-england-nhs-hospital-trusts-and-private-hospital-providers>

[^81]: NHS (2020) Recommended PPE for healthcare workers by secondary
    care inpatient clinical setting, NHS and independent sector. 15 May 2020. Available at: <https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/886707/T1_poster_Recommended_PPE_for_healthcare_workers_by_secondary_care_clinical_context.pdf>

[^82]: NHS (2020) How do NHS employees get a test for COVID-19? 29 April 2020. Available at: <https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/wp-content/uploads/sites/52/2020/04/COVID-19-test-for-Staff-29-04-20.pdf>

[^83]: NHS England (2020) NHS roadmap to safely bring back routine
    operations. 14 May 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.england.nhs.uk/2020/05/nhs-roadmap/>

[^84]: Davies, M. (2020) Private hospitals can resume some electives as
    COVID-19 surge eases. LaingBusson. 19 May 2020. Available at:
    [https://www.laingbuissonnews.com/healthcare-markets-content/news-healthcare-markets-content/private-hospitals-can-resume-some-electives-as-COVID-19-surge-eases/](https://www.laingbuissonnews.com/healthcare-markets-content/news-healthcare-markets-content/private-hospitals-can-resume-some-electives-as-covid-19-surge-eases/)

[^85]: NHS (2020) GP online consultations. 7 April 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.nhs.uk/using-the-nhs/nhs-services/gps/gp-online-and-video-consultations/>

[^86]: Kim YJ et al. (2020) Preparedness for COVID-19 infection
    prevention in Korea: a single-centre experience, Journal of Hospital
    Infection. [doi:
    10.1016/j.jhin.2020.04.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2020.04.018)

[^87]: Hoe GAN W, Wah LIM J, KOH D (2020) Preventing intra-hospital
    infection and transmission of COVID-19 in healthcare workers, Safety
    and Health at Work, doi: [10.1016/
    j.shaw.2020.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/%20j.shaw.2020.03.001).;
    Government of Singapore. DORSCON (2020) What do the different
    DORSCON levels mean? Published 6 February 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.gov.sg/article/what-do-the-different-dorscon-levels-mean>

[^88]: Ministry of Health, Government of New Zealand (2020) Infection
    prevention and control procedures for DHB acute care hospitals. Available at: <https://www.health.govt.nz/system/files/documents/pages/dhb_acute_care_hospitals_advice_21_april_.pdf>;

[^88a]: Newsroom (2020) Waitakere: Fifth nurse infected - one seriously ill.
    Newsroom, May 8, 2020. Available at:  <https://www.newsroom.co.nz/2020/05/08/1163674/waitakere-nurse-seriously-ill-in-hospital>

[^89]: HPSC (2020) Infection Prevention and Control Precautions for
    Possible or Confirmed COVID-19 in a Pandemic Setting. Health
    Protection Surveillance Centre. Ireland. 8 May 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.hpsc.ie/a-z/respiratory/coronavirus/novelcoronavirus/guidance/infectionpreventionandcontrolguidance/Interim%20Infection%20Prevention%20and%20Control%20Precautions%20for%20Possible%20or%20Confirmed%20COVID-19%20in%20a%20Pandemic%20Setting.pdf>

[^90]: Queensland Government (2020) Interim infection prevention and
    control guidelines for the management of COVID-19 in healthcare
    settings. Published 11 May 2020. Available at:
    [https://www.health.qld.gov.au/\_\_data/assets/pdf\_file/0038/939656/qh-COVID-19-Infection-control-guidelines.pdf](https://www.health.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0038/939656/qh-covid-19-Infection-control-guidelines.pdf);

[^90a]: Australian Government (2020) Guidance on the use of personal
    protective equipment (PPE) in hospitals during the COVID-19
    outbreak. 24 April 2020. Australian Government, Department of
    Health. <https://www.health.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/2020/04/guidance-on-the-use-of-personal-protective-equipment-ppe-in-hospitals-during-the-covid-19-outbreak.pdf>

[^90b]: Australian Government (2020) Coronavirus
    Disease 2019 (COVID-19). CDNA National Guidelines for Public Health
    Units, Australian Government, Department of Health. 13 May 2020.
    <https://www1.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/cdna-song-novel-coronavirus.htm>

[^91]: Rosenbaum, L. (2020). Facing COVID-19 in Italy — Ethics,
    Logistics, and Therapeutics on the Epidemic’s Front Line. N Engl J
    Med 2020; 382:1873-1875; Ovadia, D. (2020). COVID-19: What Can the
    World Learn From Italy? Medscape. Published March 13, 2020.
    <https://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/926777#vp_4>; 
	
[^91a]: Ministero della
    Salut (2020). Indicazioni ad interim per la prevenzione e il
    controllo dell’infezione da SARS-COV-2 in strutture residenziali
    sociosanitarie. Published on April 18, 2020. Available at:
    <http://www.trovanorme.salute.gov.it/norme/renderNormsanPdf?anno=2020&codLeg=73875&parte=1%20&serie=null>

[^92]: Sorbello, M. et al. (2020). The Italian coronavirus disease 2019
    outbreak: recommendations from clinical practice. Anaesthesia. doi:
    [10.1111/anae.15049](https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.15049)

[^93]: Nava, S., Tonelli, R., Clini, E. (2020). An Italian sacrifice to
    COVID-19 epidemic. European Respiratory Journal. doi:
    [10.1183/13993003.01445-2020](https://erj.ersjournals.com/content/early/2020/05/07/13993003.01445-2020)

[^94]: Schwierzeck, V., König, J., Kühn, J., Mellmann, A.,
    Correa-Martínez, C., Omran, H., Konrad, M., Kaiser, T., Kampmeier,
    S. (2020) First reported nosocomial outbreak of severe acute
    respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in a pediatric
    dialysis unit, Clinical Infectious Diseases, ciaa491, [doi:
    10.1093/cid/ciaa491](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa491)

[^95]: Robert Koch Institute. (2020). Guidelines for prevention and
    management of SARS-CoV2 in healthcare facilities.
    <https://www.rki.de/DE/Content/InfAZ/N/Neuartiges_Coronavirus/nCoV_node.html>

[^96]: <https://www.berlin.de/corona/en/testing-facilities/>

[^97]: Sundhedsstyrelsen (National Board of Health) (2020) Guidelines
    for handling COVID-19 in healthcare. Translated from Danish.
    Available at:
    <https://www.sst.dk/-/media/Udgivelser/2020/Corona/Retningslinjer/Retningslinjer-for-haandtering-af-COVID-19.ashx?la=da&hash=BE6BE868AA53E335DD6F7003AD134D5E5D8AD122>

[^98]: Olesen, B. et al (2020). Infection prevention partners up with
    psychology in a Danish Hospital successfully addressing staffs fear
    during the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Hospital Infection.
    Available at:
    <https://www.journalofhospitalinfection.com/action/showPdf?pii=S0195-6701%2820%2930208-5>

[^99]: The Local (2020) Here’s what healthcare workers in Sweden are
    saying abou the coronavirus. Published 6 April 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.thelocal.se/20200406/heres-what-healthcare-workers-in-sweden-are-saying-about-the-coronavirus>;
    Medpage Today(2020 Are Stockholm’s hospitals about to break?
    Published 1 May 2020. Available at:
    [https://www.medpagetoday.com/infectiousdisease/COVID19/86256](https://www.medpagetoday.com/infectiousdisease/covid19/86256)

[^100]: National Board of Health and Welfare, Ministry of Health and
    Social Affairs, Sweden (2020) Emergency and outpatient care: Support
    for triage. March 2020. Available at:
    [https://www.socialstyrelsen.se/globalassets/sharepoint-dokument/dokument-webb/kunskapsstod/COVID19-yttre-triage-skiss.pdf](https://www.socialstyrelsen.se/globalassets/sharepoint-dokument/dokument-webb/kunskapsstod/covid19-yttre-triage-skiss.pdf)

[^101]: Public Health Agency of Sweden (2020). Testing, vaccination, and
    treatment. Published May 13, 2020. Available at:
    [https://www.folkhalsomyndigheten.se/the-public-health-agency-of-sweden/communicable-disease-control/COVID-19/testing-vaccination-and-treatment/](https://www.folkhalsomyndigheten.se/the-public-health-agency-of-sweden/communicable-disease-control/covid-19/testing-vaccination-and-treatment/)

[^102]: Radio Sweden (2020) Healthcare staff without symptoms tested
    positive for COVID-19. Published on April 8. Available at:
    <https://sverigesradio.se/sida/artikel.aspx?programid=2054&artikel=7448444>

[^103]: Norwegian Institute of Public Health (2020) Test criteria for
    coronavirus. Updated on May 7. Available at:
    <https://www.fhi.no/en/op/novel-coronavirus-facts-advice/advice-to-health-personnel/test-criteria-for-coronavirus/?term=&h=1>

[^104]: Forland, F. (2020) The Politics of Pandemics: Norway's response
    to COVID-19. Webinar by Frode Forland, Specialist Director at the
    Norwegian Public Health Institute. Published on May 8. Available
    at:[https://www.sum.uio.no/english/research/news-and-events/events/guest-lectures-seminars/2019/Norway-COVID-response](https://www.sum.uio.no/english/research/news-and-events/events/guest-lectures-seminars/2019/Norway-covid-response)

[^105]: Li, R. and Chung, D. (2020). The Role Of Hospital Infection
    Control In Flattening The COVID-19 Curve: Lessons From South Korea.
    Health Affairs. Published on May 15. Available at:
    <https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hblog20200511.415767/full/>

[^106]: Ramsay, S. (2020). Coronavirus: The Italian COVID-19 hospital
    where no medics have been infected. Sky News. Published April 1.
    Available at:
    [https://news.sky.com/story/coronavirus-the-italian-COVID-19-hospital-where-no-medics-have-been-infected-11966344](https://news.sky.com/story/coronavirus-the-italian-covid-19-hospital-where-no-medics-have-been-infected-11966344)
