---
title: Test, Trace, Isolate
date: 2020-05-27 00:00:00 Z
layout: report
abstract: |
  When effectively implemented at scale, Test, Trace, Isolate (TTI) can contribute to controlling the UK COVID-19 epidemic, but only as part of a wider package of public health interventions, including physical and social distancing, control of infection procedures, outbreak investigation and control. TTI is most effective in breaking chains of transmission, and reducing the effective reproductive number (R<sub>e</sub>), when there is maximum: (i) **speed**, i.e., quick turn-around of both index case testing and contact tracing (and testing); (ii) **compliance**, i.e., a high proportion of people in each chain are willing and able to follow guidance; and (iii) **coverage**, i.e., identification of most chains through integration of consistent case data and real-time, high-precision population surveillance. Each of these three aspects of TTI needs careful attention, as do the trade-offs implicit in choices of how precisely to implement TTI in terms of who to test, trace and isolate, and when to do so.

  Based on our modelling work, we confirm that social distancing and self-isolation of symptomatic individuals and quarantine of their household contacts has a substantial impact on the number of new infections generated by each index case. We further show that adding contact tracing for extra-household contacts of confirmed cases to this broader package of interventions reduces the number of new infections otherwise generated by 5-15%. The upper end of this range represents scenarios where the overall test and trace period for contacts has been reduced from five days to three days. Furthermore, the level of compliance with TTI guidance strongly affects its usefulness, as there are many steps in the TTI system at which cases and contacts can be lost. Phone-based apps may be able to increase TTI speed and compliance but is likely to be an adjunct to a manual TTI system. Both incentives and clear messaging relating to TTI participation and compliance with isolation measures are also likely to be needed to maximize TTI’s effectiveness.

  TTI and surveillance systems are mutually beneficial, since TTI can capture important data on index cases and contacts, while surveillance can provide indications of who/where to target for testing, even when they are not part of an identified transmission chain. Finally, TTI will require substantial coordination across a wide range of organizations, including central and local government departments, PHE, the NHS and business groups. In particular, local integration of systems is likely to maximize ability to conduct the agile, locally differentiated outbreak management that may be needed as the epidemic evolves.

  The Royal Society's News Page gives an overview of the report: <https://royalsociety.org/news/2020/05/success-of-test-trace-and-isolate-programmes-depends-on-speed-compliance-and-monitoring>
---

*This work was carried out rapidly in May 2020 so that an early
version could inform discussions at SAGE. It may be revisited as further
scientific evidence becomes available.*

## Summary

{{ page.abstract | markdownify }}

### Table of Contents

* [Key points](#key-points)
* [Test Trace Isolate](test-trace-isolate)
  1. [The role of TTI in COVID-19 response](#1-the-role-of-tti-in-covid-19-response)
  2. [Factors that influence optimal performance of a TTI system](#2-factors-that-influence-optimal-performance-of-a-tti-system)
  3. [Increasing speed of testing and tracing](#3-increasing-speed-of-testing-and-tracing)
  4. [Maximizing population participation and compliance with TTI guidance](#4-maximizing-population-participation-and-compliance-with-tti-guidance)
    * [Avoid Perception of Negative Consequences from Engaging in TTI](#avoid-perception-of-negative-consequences-from-engaging-in-tti)
    * [Incentivize Participation in TTI](#incentivize-participation-in-tti)
  5. [Increasing epidemic coverage of TTI](#5-increasing-epidemic-coverage-of-tti)
  6. [Managing TTI capacity constraints](#6-managing-tti-capacity-constraints)
    * [Which contacts should be traced?](#which-contacts-should-be-traced)
    * [Which contacts should be asked to isolate, and when?](#which-contacts-should-be-asked-to-isolate-and-when)
  7. [Effective TTI within a broader epidemic response](#7-effective-tti-within-a-broader-epidemic-response)
  8. [Next steps](#8-next-steps)
* [Technical Appendices](#technical-appendices){% assign addenda = site.addenda | sort: 'date' | reverse %}{% for addendum in addenda  %}{% if addendum.report == 'TTI' %}
  * [{{ addendum.title }}]({%if addendum.pdfonly %}{{ addendum.pdf }}{% else %}{{ addendum.url }}{%endif%}){% endif %}{% endfor %}
  * [Simulation Software](https://github.com/rs-delve/tti-explorer/)
* [Footnotes and References](#footnotes-and-references)



## Key points 

1.  **The role of TTI in COVID-19 response**. At time of writing, it
    seems likely that the UK’s focus in the short- to medium-term will
    be on containing the COVID-19 epidemic and driving down case
    numbers, while balancing policies to reduce transmission alongside
    policies to manage the wider health and economic impacts of the
    epidemic. Test, Trace, Isolate (TTI), defined as the chained process
    of testing index individuals with symptoms or known contact with
    past cases, monitoring contacts of these index cases and potentially
    limiting their interactions (through isolation and quarantine) can
    play an important role in controlling COVID-19. In combination with
    other measures, TTI has been comprehensively implemented early in
    epidemics in several countries who have controlled their epidemics,
    and maintained when case numbers increased.

2.  **Factors that influence optimal performance of a TTI system**.
    COVID-19, like any infectious disease epidemic, is a collection of
    transmission chains. Modelling by several teams, including new
    analysis presented here, in addition to experiences with previous
    epidemics, highlights that TTI for COVID-19 can be effective at
    breaking chains of transmission when: (i) there is quick turn-around
    between testing index cases and tracing (and testing) contacts; (ii)
    a high proportion of people in each chain are identified and willing
    and able to comply with TTI guidance; and (iii) a high proportion of
    transmission chains are identified through real-time, high-precision
    surveillance (i.e., regular, quasi-random nationwide diagnostic
    testing). It is notable that countries with successful COVID-19
    control strategies integrated TTI within a wider framework of
    measures, and were effective in all three of these areas. Each of
    these three aspects of TTI therefore needs careful attention.

3.  **Increasing speed of testing and tracing**. The short serial
    interval (average time between index case and infected contact
    becoming infectious, estimated at 5-6 days) and high level of likely
    pre-symptomatic transmission of COVID-19 means that speed is of the
    essence in using TTI to break infection chains. When there are
    delays in getting tests for index cases and tracing contacts of
    proven cases, secondary cases are often not found until they
    themselves have been infectious for some time. Shortening the time
    taken to test and to trace individuals makes a substantial impact on
    the relative effectiveness of TTI: our simulation model finds that
    reducing the overall turnaround time from five days to three leads
    to 60% greater reduction in R<sub>e</sub> due to contact tracing of
    extra-household contacts. Since the impact of a TTI system on
    secondary infections is dominated by the large impact of immediate
    isolation of symptomatic cases and their household contacts, the
    absolute effect of speeding up testing and tracing is modest.
    Testing and tracing can be sped up using existing infrastructure and
    experiences from optimising care for other health conditions (e.g.,
    Tuberculosis, sexually transmitted infections). Policy choices on
    overall TTI capacity are critical and affect decisions on how to be
    utilise TTI. As capacity is approached, TTI speed will be strongly
    affected, and bringing more people into the system (e.g., tracing
    contacts before index test results are known, testing
    non-symptomatic contacts) can create trade-offs in terms of resource
    requirements and epidemic growth. In particular, due to the poor
    sensitivity and specificity of COVID-19 symptoms, and high incidence
    of non-COVID-19 COVID symptoms, tracing contacts of all those
    reporting these symptoms before test results are available will
    likely prove inefficient, placing a large demand on the system and
    potentially undermining its speed and effectiveness.

4.  **Maximizing population participation and compliance with TTI
    guidance**. Keeping all those individuals found to be in contact
    chains engaged within the TTI system is also crucial to its success.
    Cases can leak from the TTI system at the point of initial symptom
    reporting (due to not having symptoms or choosing not to report
    them), and at every stage thereafter, including timely testing,
    contact finding and compliance with requests/requirements to test,
    quarantine or isolate. As a result, the impact of adding TTI on
    transmission is sensitive to the ability of the system to reach
    affected individuals and such individuals’ ability to comply with
    guidance. Some of these leakages can be addressed through improved
    TTI systems, including potentially the use of phone-based apps.
    However, incentives to participate and comply are also likely to be
    needed. Insights from other health and non-health work suggest
    several options for creating such incentives, including incentives
    for app use (e.g., more rapid testing, improved access to health
    advice and support during quarantine and isolation) and working with
    employers and communities to incentivize groups through benefits for
    all (e.g., access to relaxed NPI regimes).

5.  **Increasing epidemic coverage of TTI**. Bringing more contact
    chains within the ambit of TTI is central to its effectiveness.
    Increasing TTI coverage requires strong data collection and
    management systems, and the integration of case-based data with
    broader surveillance efforts, particularly for capturing new chains
    as they flare up. In this respect, surveillance and TTI are mutually
    beneficial, since TTI can capture important data on index cases and
    contacts, while surveillance can provide indications of who/where to
    target for testing, even when they are not part of an existing
    identified chain. This paper proposes ways in which the UK might
    design an efficient surveillance process and analyse the data
    collected to maximize the effectiveness of TTI. Existing data
    collection efforts - including those from TTI, from other ad-hoc
    systems (e.g., self-reported symptoms or calls to health actors) and
    from systematic population-based testing work such as the ONS
    COVID-19 Infection survey – need to be coordinated to ensure
    standardized data collection that will allow triangulation of
    information and localization of responses. This requires increased
    granularity of data in terms of person, time and place for new
    transmission chains, outbreaks and each individual case and contact.

6.  **Managing TTI capacity constraints**. As the TTI system becomes
    faster and more comprehensive, tracing and testing capacity may be
    reached, which will in turn slow testing and tracing, reducing the
    benefits of the system. While in the long-term TTI capacity may be
    expandable, if capacity limits are reached in the short-term,
    important decisions will need to be made about how to prioritize
    within TTI. These choices can be made on at least two key axes:
    prioritizing index case and contacts on the basis of risk; and
    acting based either on index case symptoms or test results. In
    particular, in our model assuming moderate NPIs, tracing and
    quarantining contacts based on index case symptoms as opposed to a
    positive test led to a five-fold increase in the number of tracing
    events required (to as many as 1 million per day), and a 52-86%
    increase in the number of quarantine days required. All the
    successful TTI programs worldwide that we reviewed based contact
    tracing on laboratory confirmed index cases. To manage all these
    choices, a clear dynamic strategy will be needed for managing TTI
    capacity as the epidemic changes size and location. Strong
    integration of information from within TTI with wider surveillance
    and electronic health records will help improve the decision process
    (e.g., by predicting likely positive infections in index cases and
    contacts).

7.  **Effective TTI within a broader epidemic response**. TTI is most
    effective when it is comprehensive and efficient, rapidly reaching
    and ending most infection chains. However, even in the best of
    circumstances, TTI will not capture all transmissions, especially
    for COVID-19 due to asymptomatic and mild cases. Our review of
    existing literature and our own modelling exercise strongly suggest
    that TTI can offer some assistance to the COVID-19 epidemic
    response, provided that it is well-integrated with other
    complementary, population-based NPIs and intensive outbreak
    investigations in settings where the force of infection is high and
    widespread (e.g., care homes, hospitals, hostels). We highlight the
    importance of considering incidence levels of illnesses with similar
    symptoms and the capacity of the system itself to manage caseloads;
    similarly, deciding when to adjust NPIs will be informed by
    surveillance as well as the capacity of the local TTI system itself.
    Effective TTI will require substantial coordination across a wide
    range of organizations, including central and local government
    departments, Public Health England, the NHS and business groups.
    Integration of TTI and surveillance at local levels would create
    important sources of data to support decision making for, and
    potentially provide synergies for implementation of, locally
    differentiated outbreak management. As the national epidemic
    declines, TTI will be play an increasingly important role in ending
    chains of transmission arising from distinct outbreak events and
    preventing re-emergence of generalized community transmission.


#  Test, trace, isolate 

## 1. The role of TTI in COVID-19 response

In early May 2020, the UK was estimated to be experiencing 10-20,000
incident cases of COVID-19 per day. The UK’s focus in the short- to
medium-term appears likely to be on containing the COVID-19 epidemic and
driving down case numbers, while balancing policies to reduce
transmission alongside policies to manage the wider health and economic
impacts of the epidemic. Achieving this balance will require the dynamic
balancing of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPI) as the epidemic size
fluctuates. Testing, tracing and isolation (TTI) is a tool that helps to
identify and diagnose cases, reduce onward infections, and provide vital
information that can support decision making on policy balance. TTI’s
overall effectiveness and ability to contribute to epidemic control is a
function of policy choices regarding the TTI system’s capacity,
optimisation and support for compliance, alongside wider choices about
surveillance and other NPI measures.

All aspects of a coordinated TTI system must be firmly guided by the
core public health purpose of reducing transmissions and contributing to
maintaining an effective reproduction number (R<sub>e</sub>) below 1.
Alongside its public health benefits, the system enables identification
of cases for clinical care and provides intelligence on the course of
the epidemic (surveillance), which in turn enables TTI to be targeted to
optimise its primary purpose.

This report combines data and ideas relating to TTI from several
sources, including an empirical review of the implementation and impact
of TTI in the context of COVID-19, reviews of the potential role of the
business sector and of systematic surveillance in supporting TTI, and a
single-generation mathematical model to capture how variation in TTI
implementation might affect the R<sub>e</sub>. The report’s overall goal
is to present evidence on how TTI might be implemented and what its
impact might be as part of a COVID-19 epidemic response.

COVID-19, like any infectious disease epidemic, is a collection of
transmission chains. A core principle of epidemic control for infectious
disease lies in preventing onward transmission by breaking these chains
through reducing interactions between infectious index cases and
susceptible contacts. This requires interventions to identify infected
individuals and quarantine their contacts before they themselves become
infectious.

TTI is the chained process of testing individuals with symptoms or known
contact with past cases (index individuals), and then tracing and
monitoring contacts of these index cases and potentially limiting their
interactions (through supported isolation or quarantine[^1]). TTI
reduces the speed at which the epidemic grows by identifying those at
greatest risk of having been infected and separating them from the
general population. Contact tracing can allow infected contacts to be
identified while they are still incubating the infection (and thus not
able to transmit) and while asymptomatically infectious (curtailing any
onward transmissions). A combination of testing, tracing and isolation
can therefore be potentially powerful in controlling COVID-19. In this
report, we consider TTI as reactive, starting when index cases
self-reports symptoms, as opposed to proactive population testing
(potentially based on risk factors), although we do discuss how the two
might be integrated and support one another.

TTI is typically applied in the context of other actions that can reduce
the number of potential infectious interactions in the population. These
actions fall roughly into two categories: those reducing the chance of
infection per contact, and those reducing the number of contacts.
Measures that reduce the chances that an interaction leads to
transmission include infection control in institutional settings where
social distancing may not be possible (e.g., hospitals, care homes,
prisons), increased hand washing, respiratory hygiene and use of masks
and other personal protective equipment. Measures that reduce the number
of contacts between all individuals in the population include social
distancing (e.g., working from home, avoiding meetings with friends and
family), bans on mass gatherings and closure of schools, shops and
restaurants. Importantly, the latter greatly reduce inter-household and
community transmission, but do not much affect intra-household
transmission, a major source of secondary infections. Contact tracing
can therefore be seen as complementary to social distancing and
infection control in the context of COVID-19, insofar as it is able to
either drive within-household infection prevention efforts (i.e.,
self-isolation), or provide a gateway to extra-household isolation if
required.

Countries that have managed to, at least temporarily, control their
COVID-19 epidemics have almost all enacted and maintained substantial
testing and contact tracing efforts from early in their epidemics. These
countries include China, Iceland, New Zealand, Singapore, South Korea
and Taiwan (see summary in Technical Document 4). There are several
commonalities in these countries’ TTI approaches:

1.  Comprehensive TTI was started early in the epidemic, when the number
    of contacts needing tracing, and thus of follow-on tests, were
    small;

2.  Testing provision was widespread, decentralised and accessible in
    both traditional and novel locations, including primary healthcare
    settings;

3.  Turnaround times from symptom reporting to test result provision
    were short. For example, it takes around 5 hours from swab
    collection to test result provision in Vietnam[^2] as a result of
    the government ramping up laboratory analysis capacity. Similarly,
    in Taiwan[^3], tests results can be provided in 4 hours and in South
    Korea[^4], tests results are provided through automated text
    messages within 24-48 hours of swab collection.

4.  Contact tracing was conducted rapidly, ensuring contacts were
    reached before they became infectious. South Korea, for instance,
    uses an information communications technology (ICT) system that
    integrates GPS data, credit card information and CCTV footage to
    create a moving history (i.e. transmission route) of the confirmed
    case in 10 minutes, which is matched with the patient interview, and
    contacts are then identified and informed via text messages on the
    same day. The whole process of testing, contact tracing and
    isolation advice for contacts takes approximately 2-3 days in South
    Korea.

5.  Compliance with isolation was high due either to tailoring to homes
    (where physical separation was feasible) or through physical
    separation in institutions (e.g., hotels) or enforcement through
    fines on violation (South Korea and Taiwan)[^5][^6];

6.  Traditional manual tracing strategies were supplemented with
    app-based approaches for efficiently notifying contacts of cases and
    conducting follow-up symptom checks.

However, it is not yet possible to quantify the independent effect TTI
has on COVID-19 epidemic control, since these countries generally also
had strong early social distancing and infection control procedures.

## 2. Factors that influence optimal performance of a TTI system

COVID-19 presents a particularly challenging disease for control via TTI
because of its:

1.  Short serial interval (time between an index case and infected
    contacted becoming infectious);

2.  High level of pre-symptomatic transmissions[^7] (those occurring
    prior to symptom presentation);

3.  Non-specific and often mild symptoms; and

4.  Sometimes subclinical presentation (leading to asymptomatic
    transmissions).

These challenges mean that three aspects of a TTI system will prove
crucial to its effectiveness:

1.  The **speed** at which testing and tracing contacts can be conducted
    at scale;

2.  The level of **compliance** with guidance and participation in TTI;
    and

3.  The **coverage** of new chains of transmission TTI, based on a wider
    surveillance system.

Several recent models have shown that while TTI help with epidemic
control, a TTI system will need to be very efficient (little or no
leakage,[^8] fast testing and tracing,[^9] comprehensive use of digital
app-based contact tracing[^10]) if used in isolation to have a
substantive impact on a COVID-19 epidemic. This has led several teams
have concluded that TTI will need to be part of a combined COVID-19
control strategy.[^11] [^12] [^13]

Technical Document 3 presents a single-generation individual-based
model, based on that of Kucharski et al., which explores the impact of
pipeline speed and population compliance on the effectiveness and
resource requirements of TTI over the coming summer in the UK. It
considers three TTI strategies which trade off resource requirements and
TTI pipeline speed: (i) initiating contact tracing on symptom
presentation; (ii) initiating contact tracing only upon the index case
testing positive; and (iii) each of these with additional testing of
contacts. These strategies are evaluated in the context of a range of
other government measures with varying stringencies, including app-based
digital contact tracing. In all scenarios, we assume that on reporting
symptoms, all possible index cases are requested to immediately isolate
themselves and have their household contacts quarantine, pending test
results.

Our understanding that the present intention in the UK is to include
within the TTI system an app that combines symptom reporting with
anonymized contact tracing and facilitates access to testing, but that
most contact tracing will be done manually through PHE, with an as-yet
unfinalised interface mechanism. Our model assumes a system that
combines manual and app-based contact tracing and varies the level of
app uptake. As a result, in our model an app can rapidly identify and
inform contacts otherwise unknown to index cases, and speed quarantining
of secondary contacts.

In Figure 1 we show results from our base case scenario. In this
scenario we assume that contact tracing only commences after index cases
test positive, that these testing and tracing processes take two and one
day respectively, and that 80% of people will adhere to government
guidelines on reporting symptoms, self-isolating and quarantining if
told they are a contact of a case. When NPI are stringent (S5), most
secondary infections are prevented by social distancing. In all
scenarios, around 45% of the remaining infections are prevented by index
case isolation and quarantining of household contacts. Adding contact
tracing of extra-household contacts to the intervention package removes
around 10% of the remaining infections; the rest are not prevented due
to leakage in the TTI system, symptomatic individuals not reporting
their illness and individuals who have mild or no symptoms and do not
suspect they are infected.

<img src="/diagrams/tti/image1.png" style="width:100%" />

*Figure 1.* The contributions of different intervention strategies to
preventing secondary Covid-19 infections.

S1 to S5 are increasingly stringent NPI scenarios. S1 involves no
restrictions on social interaction, only requiring households of
symptomatic individuals to quarantine; S5 reflects the situation before
May 9<sup>th</sup>. R<sub>e</sub> reflects transmissions from index
cases to their secondary and tertiary contacts. See Technical Document 3
for details.

<img src="/diagrams/tti/image2.png" style="width:100%" />
  
*Figure 2.* The impact of varying delays in testing index cases and
tracing extra-household secondary contacts (Left). The impact of varying
compliance with steps in the TTI system (Right).

The findings of our model highlight the importance of speed and
compliance to the effectiveness of TTI. The figure above summarises the
results for test-based TTI across five scenarios ranging from most (S5)
to least (S1) severe NPI measures. Overall, this simulation indicates
that contact tracing can generate a reduction in R<sub>e</sub> of 5-15%,
depending on the stringency of other government measures and under
reasonable assumptions about testing/tracing speed and public
compliance.

## 3. Increasing speed of testing and tracing

The speed at which TTI can move along transmission chains is determined
by two quantities: the time between an index case reporting symptoms and
their test results being available, and the time required to trace their
contacts. COVID-19 combines a short serial interval (5-6 days on
average) and substantial pre-symptomatic transmission (up to 2 days
prior to symptom presentation).[^14] This provides a short window within
which infected contacts need to be reached by a TTI system to avoid
onward transmission. Between January and March in the UK, the time taken
to obtain a test result averaged 3 days, and the time to find a contact
2 days.[^15] This amounts to the entire pre-symptomatic period of the
average secondary case, meaning that by the time contacts were found,
half of their onward transmissions to tertiary cases had already
occurred. Our simulation model finds that reducing the overall
turnaround time from five days to three leads to 60% improvement in
effectiveness of the test-based TTI system (in terms of reduction in
R<sub>e</sub>), due to the quarantining of infected contacts just as
they are expected to be most infectious. For now, we assume that
point-of-care testing is not imminent, although a high-quality,
immediate test became available should provide a small additional
benefit.

A key element of TTI effectiveness is system speed at breaking
transmission chains. While the testing and tracing process can be sped
up by asking secondary contacts to quarantine at the point where either
their index case tests positive or even shows COVID-19 symptoms, these
approaches have very large economic consequences in terms of days lost
to quarantine (see section 6). Speeding up testing and tracing processes
is thus vital. App-based contact tracing can reduce the time needed for
manual tracing. However, the effectiveness of app-based tracing is
determined by overall smartphone usage and willingness to install and
use the app. Smartphones and app use may be lower among children, the
elderly and lower socioeconomic status populations, there may be ongoing
concerns around privacy and centralised vs decentralised tracing
systems, and the population may uninstall the app as the epidemic wanes.

Some ways in which each delay in the system might be addressed are
suggested below. Achieving substantial increases in speed is likely to
require a system-wide approach utilising existing public health
infrastructure and capacity, with greater linkage with primary and
community care and local authorities. This decentralised approach is
likely to enable faster test turnaround and improve on tracing delays.

1.  Time from symptom onset to patient self-reporting. This can be
    helped by a well-designed, clear public information campaign on how
    and where to report symptoms which provide access appropriate to all
    (e.g., via the NHS COVID 19 App, NHS 111 or GP. Apps that also track
    symptoms may also be able speed up reporting, at least for a
    subsection of the population.

2.  Time from symptom reporting to test taking place. This requires
    multiple access points and channels to testing, but any appointment
    systems must have minimal delays (at home or at a test centre).
    These systems could integrate the use of apps, as used recently for
    a chlamydia testing and risk assessment system.[^16] Self-swabs may
    increase speed but delivery would need to be rapid - one potential
    approach would be pick-up from central community points (e.g.,
    pharmacies, community centres, GP hubs).

3.  Time from testing to lab. Courier services are likely to be central
    here, but pharmacies as collation points for pick up within
    communities could also help, as might local NHS specimen collection.

4.  Time to get test results in the lab. Optimisation is needed for
    specimen processing and RT-PCR speed, using agreed standard
    operating procedures (SOPs). Expansion of testing to any certified
    laboratory could also improve throughput.

5.  Time to lab confirmation of results. Automation of results without
    the need for manual review using autoverification protocols is a
    possibility but timing and accuracy is of importance. Careful SOP
    use and automation may also improve quality assurance and minimise
    loss of tests and identifiers.

6.  Time to return results to testee. Automation of results reporting by
    phone, email, app or text message have the potential to help here,
    if done with care include a secure method of verifying receipt that
    minimizes privacy concerns and includes simple and clear guidance
    on: (i) self-isolation household quarantine; (ii) preventing
    intra-household transmission; and (iii) the contact tracing process.

7.  Time from positive result to contact tracing. Patient details, with
    consent, need to be concurrently passed to PHE as they are
    communicated to the testee. Once an app is live, some contacts will
    be automatically informed once index informed, and whether the
    information has been verified to be received by the recipient, but
    those without the app will still need to be managed manually. This
    manual PHE system will need to be linked with the app to know who
    has/has not been informed, especially if multiple testing channels
    are in place; this interface will be central. The creation of
    contact lists prior to testing generates logistical burdens and
    collects a lot of personal information that will ultimately not be
    used (since most people will test negative), which may reduce
    overall compliance.

## 4. Maximizing population participation and compliance with TTI guidance

While the mechanisms of the TTI system can be designed carefully to
maximize speed and efficiency, its effectiveness relies centrally on the
willingness of society to engage with it. There are multiple points in
the TTI system where non-participation can occur:

1.  Those with asymptomatic infections will not have symptoms to report,

2.  Symptomatic cases may not self-report, due either to not noticing
    (subclinical infections) or concern regarding loss of earnings if
    required to self-isolate and social stigma if their contacts are
    required to quarantine;

3.  Individuals may not complete a test if requested to complete one;

4.  Tracing of at-risk contacts is likely to be incomplete, missing some
    important contacts and being unable to find others due to anonymity
    (e.g., on public transport) given the respiratory and fomite-related
    nature of transmission, desire to remain anonymous or due to
    non-cooperation of index cases;

5.  Finally, identified contacts may not comply with requests to
    self-isolate on their own volition in their own homes (e.g., if this
    implies a loss of income), or not be willing or able to maintain
    infection control within their home (e.g., isolation in a separate
    bedroom, bathroom and cutlery, mask use).

As a result, the potential for transmissions and infectious individuals
to escape the TTI process is substantial.

In our simulation study, we used a single compliance parameter to
represent general compliance with government guidelines, specifically it
refers to the proportion of the population who will: (i) report symptoms
when they get them; (ii) quarantine their households; and (iii)
self-isolate when instructed to when contact-traced from an index case.
We found that the level of compliance significantly affects our results.
For example, for test-based TTI in the context of moderate NPIs,
R<sub>e</sub> falls from 1.9 at 50% compliance to 1.4 at 80% compliance.
We considered the added benefit of app-based tracing, but found it to
have a relatively minor impact on effectiveness in our base-case
scenario. This reflected our assumptions that all contacts of each index
case will still be (more slowly) manually traced in addition to any
app-based tracing (assuming we will not be able to tell which of a
person’s contacts have been traced via the app), and an optimistic
one-day turnaround time to carry out manual tracing. Since app-based
tracing is effectively instantaneous, the longer manual tracing takes,
the greater the benefits of the app.

Maximizing population participation and compliance will necessarily draw
on psychological and economic, as well as technological, factors.
Approaches will need to consider two key factors:

### Avoid Perception of Negative Consequences from Engaging in TTI

People are less likely to engage in the TTI process if they believe that
this will lead to a substantial burden in terms of testing, quarantine
or isolation for themselves or others. An important consideration when
considering whether to quarantine contacts based on index case symptoms
(rather than a positive test) is how the resulting unpopularity with
family and work colleagues - particularly if they ultimately test
negative for SARS-COV-2 - will affect the willingness of index cases to
report those symptoms. The speed benefits of quarantining contacts at
the point that index cases report symptoms may be outweighed by
decreased TTI engagement.

Another important consideration in the context of integrating a tracking
app into the TTI process is the level of public confidence engendered by
a centralized app system. Independent of the actual risks of data
integrity, perceptions of the possibility of data being lost or misused
will affect willingness to use the app or become involved in the TTI
process more broadly. These uptake costs will need to be considered in
light of the technological benefits of a centralized system, and careful
public messaging will be required to reassure the public that the risks
are reasonable given the benefits.

### Incentivize Participation in TTI

As well as minimizing avoidable losses, steps can be taken to actively
increase involvement in the TTI process. These processes will need to be
integrated across sectors of society and include pro-social messaging,
incentives and potentially sanctions for non-involvement.

Clear messaging is needed on how to participate in TTI, and what the
benefits of participation are at both the individual and population
level. Messaging to the public can emphasize that involvement in TTI
will provide population-level benefits, by reducing epidemic spread, and
potentially allowing greater freedoms. Making messaging effective
involves more than providing credible information, it relies on creating
a consistent and appealing narrative for TTI. One area where this will
be crucial is for any tracking or tracing app - since its usefulness
scales quadratically with uptake (both index and contact need to have
the app for it work). Harnessing pre-existing social networks in
messaging can enhance trust in the system. Thus, to be effective, such
dissemination should use local networks where trust is highest, such as
GP surgeries, clubs, community groups, unions and professional
associations and religious organizations.

However, evidence from a range of public programs shows that appeals to
individuals’ pro-social motivation, especially when they are asked to
take actions which are personally costly, will be insufficient alone:
effective deployment of TTI will therefore also require consideration of
incentives and sanctions. Evidence from RCTs in developing countries
have shown that even small incentives can enhance compliance with
testing for HIV, partly by increasing the salience of the benefits of
such tests.[^17] TTI can be crafted to provide direct individual-level
benefits through faster information provision. Willingness to
participate in tracing can be linked to regular symptom checks, health
advice and rapid access to testing and results; even more so if using an
app. All this will need to be carefully designed to ensure provision of
easy-to-follow, practical advice about how to comply with TTI guidance,
including reporting procedures, testing processes and how to effectively
self-isolate and practice infection control within the household.

Reaching beyond the individuals directly involved in TTI, there is also
potential to incentivize employers and communities, as outlined in
Technical Document 1. This will have benefits beyond TTI, for example
when rolling out a vaccination program if that happens. Workplaces or
geographies with high participation in testing, tracing, isolation or
app use might be offered faster access to relaxed NPI regimes or
workplace reopening; the extension of the furlough scheme to cover
payments for isolation and quarantine could also incentivise staff
compliance with testing and isolating as appropriate, among those who
cannot work from home.

Whatever incentive structures are put in place, it will be important to
consider their potential equity impacts, both for intrinsic reasons and
since impact unequal effects are likely to suppress willingness to
participate overall. Notably, some groups at greatest risk of COVID-19
acquisition and poor outcomes (e.g., the elderly, black, Asian, and
minority ethnic communities,[^18] frontline service-sector workers[^19])
may be less likely to have smartphone access, and those industries and
groups most affected by NPIs (e.g., the self-employed) may be least
easily engaged in workplace programs.

## 5. Increasing epidemic coverage of TTI 

The existence of pre-symptomatic, and particularly asymptomatic or
symptom non-specific, transmission for COVID-19 may generate a
substantial number of transmission chains that will not be picked up
even by a highly efficient TTI system. Beyond the mechanics of the TTI
process, there are several ways in which the use of TTI can be targeted
to further increase efficiency. These revolve around maximizing the
ability to identify those most likely to be infected. Strategies to
achieve this include continuously improving predictive models as
knowledge of more specific symptoms of COVID-19, such as loss of smell,
comes to light, and prioritising individuals likely to have greatest
potential transmission to others (e.g., through their occupation or
geographical localisation). Provided testing protocols are consistent,
TTI test results can be used to augment survey data and so refine local
estimates of incidence.

Finding people infected with COVID-19 when community transmission is
common will require a detailed understanding of how incidence,
prevalence and risk factors for COVID-19 vary across geography,
demography and economic sectors. Such understanding will in turn, as
outlined in Technical Document 2, require well-designed country-wide
stratified quasi-random sampling and diagnostic testing, which can be
triangulated with self-reported symptom data (e.g., through apps such as
the Zoe COVID Symptom Study app) and case reporting data.

This triangulated data will provide real-time, stratum-specific
incidence predictions to inform selection of individuals for TTI
follow-up, as well as sample adaptation for subsequent surveillance.
Such surveillance data can help target initial testing procedures at
those likely to become infected (e.g., young people) and those likely to
be infectious (e.g., service staff in busy establishments, especially
health and social care settings). They can also help target tracing and
secondary testing efforts (e.g., focusing on household contacts, those
still working). A fuller understanding of the geographic spread of
COVID-19 could also allow focused use of scarce contact tracing
resources to key areas of the country, especially as the epidemic grows
smaller.

Technical Document 2 provides details on how the UK might design an
efficient surveillance process and analyse the data collected to
maximize the effectiveness of TTI, building on existing serological
surveys such as that led by the Office for National Statistics.[^20] In
addition to surveillance activities, business sectors could be profiled
in a risk assessment exercise to determine the frequency with which
testing would be required to reopen, with employers potentially
responsible for compliance (see Technical Document 1). Expanding regular
pro-active testing (and subsequent TTI as needed) to key economic
sectors might also help to increase the overall proportion of
transmission chains brought within the TTI system. Decisions to open
sectors would need to be linked to how each business type might affect
epidemic spread and its economic value.

Surveillance and TTI are mutually beneficial, since TTI can capture
important data on index cases and contacts, while surveillance can
provide indications of who/where to target for testing even when they
are not part of an existing chain. For these synergies to be realised,
however, data collection efforts need to be coordinated and
asynchronous. Coordination is required through standardized data
collection to allow triangulation across TTI, other health surveillance
systems (e.g., calls to health actors or app-based symptom tracking) and
systematic population-based testing. Maximum benefit will be gained when
that surveillance systems provide information complementary to that
arising from TTI, and additional to standardly available information
sources. This combination of characteristics will allow surveillance to
add benefit to TTI, helping to localize responses. Localisation could be
by sector, for example to focus on particularly vulnerable
sub-populations (e.g., the elderly), or by geography to take account of
risk-factors for which small-area-level data are available (e.g.,
deprivation).

Standardized data collection processes will have to balance the need for
key information with the data quality losses, and lack of participation,
that may arise from asking for too much data. Core population-level data
will need to include the number of newly infected individuals (including
pre-symptomatic, asymptomatic and untested), stratified by geography,
demography and sector. Prevalence of current (PCR) and past (antibody)
infection can be estimated and tracked over time by stratified random
population studies and case, hospital and mortality data. Added
precision may be obtainable by supplementing “hard outcome” data of this
kind with information from symptom tracker apps. At the individual
level, key sociodemographic information will also need to be collected,
including minimally age, sex, ethnicity, geographic location, household
composition and occupation. An understanding of how index cases are
connected to known transmission chains will hopefully be captured in the
TTI process. All these data allow for targeting of limited resources,
including testing algorithms, and planning for future resource needs and
scenario feasibility.

## 6. Managing TTI capacity constraints

Building a faster, more comprehensive TTI system is central to it
playing an effective role in combating the epidemic. Importantly,
however, as tracing and testing capacity is reached, the speed of both
is likely to reduce, which in turn reduces the benefits of the TTI
system. While in the long-term TTI capacity may be expandable, in the
shorter-term if capacity limits are reached, important decisions will
need to be made about which activities will be prioritized.

### Which contacts should be traced? 

In an epidemic with highly sensitive and specific symptoms, it is more
feasible to trace contacts of anyone presenting with symptoms. Since
COVID-19 lacks specific symptoms (many are similar to a range of other
common respiratory infections) and asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic
cases are common, symptom-based tracing can become extremely resource
intensive when epidemics are large or when other health conditions
generate many false positives (e.g., seasonal influenza and colds).
Furthermore, requiring many contacts of false-positive index cases to
quarantine (if this is policy) will have substantial consequences for
the economy, and could have limited public acceptability of TTI when
contacts realise they have been needlessly isolated.

All the established TTI systems we reviewed (Technical Document 4) trace
only the contacts of index cases who have tested positive for COVID-19,
as opposed to all those reporting symptoms. While test-based tracing
introduces a delay into the system that will generate some secondary
cases, if capacity is limiting this may be balanced by a faster contact
tracing process once begun, due to the reduced number of tracing events
required, and reduced resource requirements. For example, daily incident
COVID infections in mid-May were estimated to be 10,000 (we used an
upper confidence bound of 20,000 in our simulations),[^21] while daily
pre-COVID fever or cough presentations over the summer averaged
100,000,[^22] [^23] and the average number of close contacts that would
have to be quarantined is on the order of 10-12 per index case.[^24]
[^25] [^26] Our simulations found that a symptom-based tracing system
generated 52-86% more person-days of quarantine and over five times as
many manual traces than a test-based one – on the order of 1 million
contacts needing manual tracing each day, over 80% of whom will later
prove unnecessary when the index case tests negative. While absolute
numbers here are driven by seasonality and epidemic stage, the relative
resource requirement of symptom-based testing remains substantially
higher across a reasonable range of scenarios.

An intermediate position between a fully-symptom and fully-test-positive
approach could be to augment symptoms with other information about index
cases (e.g., risk factors for transmission such as occupation) to decide
whether or not to immediately start contact tracing. As TTI system
capacity improves, or the epidemic wanes, contact tracing could be
expanded to an ever-wider set of symptom-positive index cases. If a
surveillance system is in place, it can be used to increase specificity
of symptom-based contact tracing to target (e.g., local outbreaks) and
lowering risks to vulnerable populations (e.g., in care homes and
primary care).

Beyond selectively choosing to trace index cases’ contacts as a whole,
there is the potential within TTI to choose which contacts to trace. It
is well established that household and other repeated, close or
prolonged contacts (e.g., work colleagues) are at greater risk of
acquisition[^27] [^28] [^29] [^30] [^31] [^32] and might therefore
usefully be prioritized. Similarly, the tracing effort required to find
one-off, relatively brief contacts unknown to the index case is likely
to be greater, suggesting that when capacity is constrained a focus on
well-known contacts may be an efficient choice. Again, this provides an
opportunity to use data gathered from other sources, including household
contact studies, alongside the wealth of TTI information on secondary
infection yield by contact type to target contact tracing if necessary.
Real-time analysis integrating data from pre-existing sources, case/TTI
systems and designed incidence studies to produce stratum-specific
predictive probability maps of incidence can inform selection of
individuals for TTI follow-up, potentially through risk assessments on
app or triage systems that are dynamically adjusted by epidemic and NPI
levels. These predictive maps can also be used to adapt future sampling
strategies where pro-active TTI is being conducted, to maximise
efficiency and coverage.

### Which contacts should be tested, and when? 

A key question in the context of TTI is whether to test contacts, and if
so when. In our modelling we showed that, depending on the severity of
the other NPIs in place, testing all contacts of index cases who test
positive would require 50-171% more tests than using symptoms to guide
such tests, but without a substantial impact on R<sub>e</sub> (since
given testing and tracing delays, the only people they differentially
capture are those who are asymptomatic). In situations where all
contacts of positive index cases are advised to quarantine for 14 days,
even though policies typically require testing only occur after symptom
onset, most onward transmission will be strongly limited by the
quarantine process. However, as noted above, this has a substantial
social and economic impact on quarantined individuals and requires
ongoing monitoring effort from the TTI system. When capacity is limited,
selective testing of contacts may allow them to be released from
quarantine (and thus from active symptom surveillance) earlier - as well
as allowing the contacts of infected secondary contacts to be rapidly
followed up. Prioritization decisions might again rely on the likelihood
of having acquired infection, but might also want to take account of the
opportunity cost of being quarantined (e.g., focus on working-age
adults). It is, however, vital not to test too early in the infection
process (since RT-PCR tests are insensitive during much of the
incubation period,[^33] or to consider repeated testing after a period
equivalent to the presumed incubation period, before releasing people
from quarantine. Optimization of testing strategies will therefore
require a clear understanding of likely transmission timing.

### Which contacts should be asked to isolate, and when? 

The ‘isolate’ part of the TTI system also raises the potential for
trade-offs. The most comprehensive approach would be to quarantine
contacts based on symptoms in the index case, as soon as they are found.
If capacity is limiting, the very large number of people under TTI
monitoring may overwhelm capacity, at least in the short term. Once
more, these numbers can be reduced either by changing the criteria based
on the index case (so isolating contacts based on the index case testing
positive instead of based on symptoms), or by selecting those contacts
at greatest risk of being infected or generating onward transmissions.
This balance can again be calibrated depending on capacity constraints
and epidemic stage.

## 7. Effective TTI within a broader epidemic response

The effectiveness of contact tracing is highest when the information
picture of contact chains (through surveillance and reporting) is
robust, when TTI capacity can contain almost all known contact chains,
and speed, efficiency and compliance is high. With a growing epidemic,
as the capacity to infection ratio declines, so do the benefits of TTI.
In the midst of a large outbreak with substantial community spread, TTI
is likely to be resource-intensive, while providing a relatively small
benefit due to slow turnaround times. Nevertheless, under the
expectation that the UK is likely in the short- to medium-term to focus
on containing the COVID-19 epidemic and driving down case numbers, TTI
can play an important role. The exact nature of this role will depend on
the resources available to it, and the policy decisions made regarding
how it fits within the wider epidemic response. We have outlined some of
the possible TTI activity choices and explored their likely impacts.

Several of these decisions relate to a careful balance of the health and
economic impacts of the epidemic. Central to such a balancing act are
careful decisions about when to adjust NPIs. TTI provides a policy tool
that may allow somewhat greater relaxation of NPIs than would otherwise
be possible, thus the resources required to conduct TTI may provide
benefits in terms of reduced NPI stringency and thus greater economic
productivity. However, TTI’s benefits will depend on how it is
implemented. As highlighted above, TTI is most effective when it is able
to be comprehensive and efficient, rapidly reaching and ending most
infection chains. It is likely to be particularly important when
considering relaxing NPIs, e.g., when the number of new cases (in a
given area/sector) is declining. Deciding when to adjust NPIs will be
best informed by surveillance as well as the capacity of TTI itself.

Importantly, contact tracing approaches alone are unlikely to be
efficient in settings with very high force of infection (e.g., care
homes, hospitals) since tracing is most useful when some people are at
substantially greater acquisition risk than the general population -
although TTI for families and other close contacts of healthcare staff
will still be important. In high-risk settings, outbreak investigation
and infection control approaches are needed, to identify both who has
been infected (likely widely dispersed across the institution) and where
infection control has failed allowing the initial and secondary
infections to arise.

Based on all of the above, we believe that TTI will require a joined-up
epidemic response, both to maximize its internal efficiency and its
effectiveness in support of other work. Effective TTI will benefit
social distancing and other contact-reducing interventions by reducing
the number of potentially infectious contacts through increasing
infected individuals’ status awareness and their willingness to isolate.
Effective TTI can also bolster the effectiveness of antiviral treatments
(once available), by getting infected individuals onto treatment early
in their infection, rapidly controlling their viral load.

Nevertheless, effective TTI will require substantial coordination across
a wide range of organizations. This will include public health bodies
such as Public Health England, healthcare bodies such as the NHS and
private healthcare (as well as NHSx), central government departments
covering healthcare, finance and business, and local authorities who can
potentially play a vital role coordinating activities as the response
become localized in response to epidemic heterogeneity. For example,
strong coordination between app-based tracing (managed by NHSx) and
manual tracing (managed by PHE) will be needed to avoid duplication of
work and to reduce the pressure on manual tracing. Finally, integration
of TTI and surveillance at local levels would, in particular, create
important sources of data to support decision making for, and
potentially provide synergies for implementation of, locally
differentiated outbreak management.

## 8. Next steps

This report, and its technical addenda, were necessarily limited by the
time-sensitive nature of the request for its generation for input into
active policy decisions. There are several important ways in which this
work could be extended. These could include:

-   Addition of cost-effectiveness analysis to weigh up the lost
    productivity of quarantine versus health and healthcare costs;

-   Consideration of the trade-offs inherent in tight or loose criteria
    for contact tracing;

-   Consideration of the impact of waiting for different triggers to
    quarantine or isolate contacts;

-   Addition of more robust data for parameter estimation;

-   Explicit consideration of how surveillance and TTI might interact,
    and be used to conduct to proactive and risk-driven TTI, in a
    modelling framework;

-   Consideration of how TTI might reduce morbidity and mortality
    through earlier detection impacting clinical management; and

-   Extension of the current single-generation model to a dynamic
    longer-term model;

-   Evaluation of how findings differ in the context of substantially
    smaller epidemic states.

Many of these points highlight the need to include ongoing evaluation of
the TTI system as it is rolled out and the epidemic evolves.

## Technical Appendices

The following are materials prepared by individual members of DELVE as
inputs into this report.


{% assign addenda = site.addenda | sort: 'date' | reverse %}
<ul>
{% for addendum in addenda  %}
{% if addendum.report == 'TTI' %}
<li> {%if addendum.pdfonly %}<a href="{{ addendum.pdf }}">{% else %}<a href="{{ addendum.url }}">{%endif%}{{ addendum.title }}</a>
  {% if addendum.authors %}
{% assign authors=addendum.authors %}
    <p><i>Prepared for the DELVE Initiative by {% include listauthors.html %}</i></p></li>
{% endif %}
{% endif %}
{% endfor %}
</ul>

### Simulation Software

* [Github Repository for the TTI Explorer Simulation Software used for TTI-TD3](https://github.com/rs-delve/tti-explorer/).


## Footnotes and References

[^1]: Isolation refers to the separation of infected individuals from
    uninfected individuals, while quarantine refers to the separation of
    individuals exposed to infection in order to determine whether they
    have contracted a disease.

[^2]: Thai PQ., (2020). Addressing COVID-19 in Vietnam: Progress to date
    and future priorities. Usher Institute Webinars. 13 May 2020, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wibA34w8Xyo>

[^3]: Lin, C., Braund, W., Auerbach, J., Chou, J. H., Teng, J. H., Tu, P.
    and Mullen, J. (2020), Policy Decisions and Use of Information
    Technology to Fight 2019 Novel Coronavirus Disease, Taiwan. Emerging
    Infectious Diseases, Vol. 26. (doi:
    [10.3201/eid2607.200574](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2607.200574))

[^4]: The Government of Republic of Korea (2020). How Korea responded to
    a pandemic using ICT Flattening the curve on COVID-19. Published
    online April 15. Available at: <http://www.moj.go.kr/moj_eng/1765/subview.do;jsessionid=OxKrsTASqh8vttNtuzZN_O7ALY7MJKI8vWSrtLao.wizard-10-25vxq?enc=Zm5jdDF8QEB8JTJGYmJzJTJGbW9qX2VuZyUyRjUxJTJGNTIyODIyJTJGYXJ0Y2xWaWV3LmRvJTNG>

[^5]: Normile, D. (2020) Coronavirus cases have dropped sharply in South Korea. What’s the secret to its success? 17 March 2020. Science. Available at: <https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/03/coronavirus-cases-have-dropped-sharply-south-korea-whats-secret-its-success>

[^6]: Sheng-Iun, H. et al. (2020) New Taipei City man fined, taken to quarantine center. Taipei Times, 1 April 2020. Available at: <https://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2020/04/01/2003733788>

[^7]: Cheng H, Jian S, Liu D, Ng, T., and Huang, W., Lin, H. (2020)
    Contact Tracing Assessment of COVID-19 Transmission Dynamics in
    Taiwan and Risk at Different Exposure Periods Before and After
    Symptom Onset. *JAMA Intern Med.* Published online May 01,
    (doi:[10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.2020](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/article-abstract/2765641))

[^8]: Hellewell, J., Abbott, S., Gimma, A., Bosse, N., Jarvis, C.,
    Russell, T., Munday, J., Kucharski, A., Edmunds, WJ., Sun, F.,
    Flasche, S., Quilty, B., Davies, N., Liu, Y., Clifford, S., Klepac,
    P., Jit, M., Diamond, C., Gibbs, H., van Zandvoort, K., Funk, S. and
    Eggo, R. (2020) Feasibility of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by
    isolation of cases and contacts, The Lancet Global Health, Issue 4,
    488-496 (doi:[10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30074-7](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214109X20300747))

[^9]: Kretzschmar M., Rozhnova G., Bootsma M., van Boven, M., van de
    Wijgert J. and Bonten M. (2020) Time is of the essence: impact of
    delays on effectiveness of contact tracing for COVID-19. MedRxiv.
    <https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.05.09.20096289v1>

[^10]: Ferretti, L., Wymant, C., Kendall, M., Zhao, L., Nurtay, A.,
    Abeler-Dörner, L., Parker, M., Bonsall, D. and Fraser, C. (2020)
    Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with
    digital contact tracing, Science (doi:[10.1126/science.abb6936](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb6936))

[^11]: Kretzschmar, M., Rozhnova, G., and van Boven, M. (2020) Isolation
    and Contact Tracing Can Tip the Scale To Containment of COVID-19 In
    Populations with Social Distancing. PrePrint: The Lancet (doi:
    [10.2139/ssrn.3562458](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3562458))

[^12]: Kucharski, A., Klepac, P., Conlan, A., Kissler, S., Tang, M.,
    Fry, H., Gog, J., Edmunds, J. and CMMID COVID-19 Working Group
    (2020) Effectiveness of isolation, testing, contact tracing and
    physical distancing on reducing transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in
    different settings, medRxiv 2020.04.23.20077024 (doi: [10.1101/2020.04.23.20077024](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.23.20077024v1))

[^13]: Goscé, L., Phillips, A., Spinola, P., Gupta, R.K., and Abubakar,
    I. (2020) Modelling SARS-COV2 Spread in London: Approaches to Lift
    the Lockdown. Preprints 2020, 2020050055

[^14]: He, X., Lau, E., Wu, P., Deng, X., Wang, J., Hao, X., Lau Y et
    al. (2020) Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility
    of COVID-19. *Nature Medicine*: 26, 672-675 (doi:
    [10.1038/s41591-020-0869-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0869-5))

[^15]: PHE, personal communications

[^16]: Estcourt C., Gibbs J, Sutcliffe L., et al. (2017) The eSexual
    Health Clinic system for management, prevention, and control of
    sexually transmitted infections: exploratory studies in people
    testing for Chlamydia trachomatis. Lancet Public Health, 2(4):
    e182‐e190.
    (doi:[10.1016/S2468-2667(17)30034-8](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29253450))

[^17]: Kranzer, K., Simms, V., Bandason, T., Dauya, E., McHugh, G.,
    Munyati,, S, Chonzi, P., Dakshina, S., Mujuru, H., Weiss, H.,
    Ferrand, R. (2018) Economic incentives for HIV testing by
    adolescents in Zimbabwe: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet HIV,
    5, 2, e79-e86. (doi: [10.1016/S2352-3018(17)30176-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2352-3018(17)30176-5))

[^18]: Aldridge, R.W., Lewer, D., Katikireddi, S.V., Mathur, R., Pathak,
    N., Burns, R., Fragaszy, E.B., Johnson, A.M., Devakumar, D.,
    Abubakar I, Hayward, A., 2020. Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic
    groups in England are at increased risk of death from COVID-19:
    indirect standardisation of NHS mortality data. Wellcome Open
    Research, 5: 88 (doi: [10.12688/wellcomeopenres.15922.1](https://wellcomeopenresearch.org/articles/5-88/v1))

[^19]: Lan, F., Wei, C., Hsu, Y., Christiani, D. and Kales, S. (2020)
    Work-related Covid-19 transmission. *medRxiv,* Available at:
    <https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.08.20058297v2>

[^20]: Office for National Statistics (2020) Coronavirus (COVID-19)
    Infection Survey pilot: England, 10 May 2020.
    <https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/coronaviruscovid19infectionsurvey/england10may2020>

[^21]: Flaxman, S., Mishra, S., Gandy, A., Unwin, H., Coupland, H.,
    Mellan, T., Zhu, H., Berah, T., Eaton, J., Perez Guzman, P. and
    Schmit, N. et al. (2020) Report 13: Estimating the number of
    infections and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on
    COVID-19 in 11 European countries. Available at:
    <https://spiral.imperial.ac.uk/handle/10044/1/77731>  
    (doi: [10.25561/77731](https://spiral.imperial.ac.uk:8443/handle/10044/1/77731))

[^22]: Smith, C.M., Conolly, A., Fuller, C., et al. (2019). Symptom
    reporting, healthcare-seeking behaviour and antibiotic use for
    common infections: protocol for Bug Watch, a prospective community
    cohort study. BMJ Open, 9, 5 (doi:
    [10.1136/bmjopen-2018-028676](https://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/9/5/e028676))

[^23]: Cowling, Benjamin J., et al (2020) Impact assessment of
    non-pharmaceutical interventions against coronavirus disease 2019
    and influenza in Hong Kong: an observational study. *The Lancet
    Public Health* (doi: [10.1016/S2468-2667(20)30090-6](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpub/article/PIIS2468-2667(20)30090-6/fulltext))

[^24]: PHE, personal communications.

[^25]: Klepac, P., Kissler, S. and Gog J. (2018) Contagion! The BBC Four
    Pandemic - The model behind the documentary., *Epidemics, 24*, 49 -
    59 (doi: [10.1016/j.epidem.2018.03.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epidem.2018.03.003))

[^26]: Mossong, J., Hens, N., Jit, M., Beutels, P., Auranen, K.,
    Mikolajczyk, R., Massari, M. et al. (2008) Social contacts and
    mixing patterns relevant to the spread of infectious diseases. *PLoS
    medicine,* 5, 3. (doi: [10.1371/journal.pmed.0050074](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0050074))

[^27]: Bi, Q., Wu, Y., Mei, S., Ye, C., Zou, X., Zhang Z. et al. (2020)
    Epidemiology and Transmission of COVID-19 in Shenzhen China:
    Analysis of 391 cases and 1,286 of their close contacts: a
    retrospective cohort study. Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2020
    (doi:[10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30287-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30287-5))

[^28]: Burke R., Midgley C., Dratch, A., Fenstersheib, M., Haupt, T.,
    Holshue, M., et al. (2020) Active Monitoring of Persons Exposed to 
	Patients with Confirmed COVID-19 — United States, January–February 2020.
    MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 6 March 2020, 69, 9, 245–6 (doi: [10.15585/mmwr.mm6909e1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32134909))

[^29]: Luo, L., Liu, D., Liao, X., Wu, X., Jing, Q., Zheng, J., et al.
    (2020) Modes of contact and risk of transmission in COVID-19 among
    close contacts, MedRxiv, (doi: [10.1101/2020.03.24.20042606](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.24.20042606v1))

[^30]: Cheng, H., Jian, S., Liu D., Ng T., and Huang W. (2020) High
    transmissibility of COVID-19 near symptom onset. MedRxiv <http://medrxiv.org/lookup/>
    (doi: [10.1101/2020.03.18.20034561](http://medrxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2020.03.18.20034561))

[^31]: Chen, Y., Wang, A., Yi, B., Ding, K., Wang, H., Wang, J., et al.
    (2020) The epidemiological characteristics of infection in close
    contacts of COVID-19 in Ningbo city. Chin J Epidemiol. 41

[^32]: Jing, Q-L., Liu, M-J., Yuan, J., Zhang, Z-B., Zhang, A-R., Dean,
    NE., et al. (2020) Household Secondary Attack Rate of COVID-19 and
    Associated Determinants. MedRxiv. (doi: [10.1101/2020.04.11.20056010](http://medrxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2020.04.11.20056010))

[^33]: Kucirka LM, Lauer SA, Laeyedecker O, Doon D, Lessler J Variation
    in False-Negative Rate of Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain
    Reaction–Based SARS-CoV-2 Tests by Time Since Exposure. Annals of
    Internal Medicine. 2020. (doi:
    [10.7326/M20-1495](https://doi.org/10.7326/M20-1495))
