---
title: Balancing the Risks of Pupils Returning to Schools
date: 2020-07-24
report_number: 4
layout: report
abstract: |
  As we move into a phase of continuously reviewing decisions to keep
  schools open or shut, we need to recognise there are risks from having
  schools open and risks from having schools shut. In open schools, the
  risks to pupils themselves from COVID-19 are very low, though there are
  risks to school staff, parents/carers and the wider community. Closing

  schools causes loss of learning and deterioration in children’s
  mental and physical health, for example. Keeping schools shut
  increases inequalities, in both children’s education achievement and
  their long-term prospects. The goal of “levelling up” therefore
  needs schools to be open. Keeping schools open is also the key to
  unlocking the rest of the economy, allowing parents to leave
  teaching to teachers and return to their own jobs.  The evidence on
  the infection risk from school opening is limited, though to date it
  suggests that the risk from opening schools, relative to restarting
  many other activities, is not as high. The experience of most other
  countries which have already taken this step supports this. By
  contrast, the evidence on the negative impact of closing schools is
  considerable and robust. <!--break-->

  The report sets out this case in detail. The aim is to provide an
  evidence framework for understanding the risks involved in
  re-opening and re-closing schools.

  The key issues are the effect of schools closing and re-opening on:

  -   risks from infection

  -   risks from loss of skills and increases in inequality

  -   risks to child and parent mental health

  -   risks from parents not being able to return to work.

  The report addresses each these in turn, describing first the current
  state of knowledge, and second, the steps that we can take to collect
  more data specific to the UK to inform future decisions.
note: "This paper has drawn on evidence available up to 10 July 2020. Further
evidence on this topic is constantly published and DELVE will continue
to develop this report as it is prepared for publication. This
independent overview of the science has been provided in good faith by
subject experts. DELVE and the Royal Society accept no legal liability
for decisions made based on this evidence."
---

### Table of Contents

* [Recommendations](#recommendations)
* [Context](#context)
* [Schools and infection](#schools-and-infection)
* [Schools and learning loss](#schools-and-learning-loss)
* [Schools and health](#schools-and-health)
* [Schools and parental employment and earnings](#schools-and-parental-employment-and-earnings)
* [Commentary on the Government’s school opening plan](#commentary-on-the-governments-school-opening-plan)
* [Next steps](#next-steps)
* [Report Findings](#report-findings)
  1. [Background](#background)
  2. [Opening Schools Safely](#opening-schools-safely)
  3. [Learning loss from school closures](#learning-loss-from-school-closures)
  4. [Measures of other losses](#4-measures-of-other-losses)
  5. [Commentary on the Government’s school opening plan & next steps](#5-commentary-on-the-governments-school-opening-plan-next-steps)
* [Technical Appendices](#technical-appendices){% assign addenda = site.addenda | sort: 'ref' %}{% for addendum in addenda  %}{% if addendum.report == 'SCH' %}
  * [{{ addendum.title }}]({%if addendum.pdfonly %}{{ addendum.pdf }}{% else %}{{ addendum.url }}{%endif%}){% endif %}{% endfor %}
* [Appendix: Estimates of the socio-economic gaps in learning](#appendix-estimates-of-the-socio-economic-gaps-in-learning)
* [Footnotes and References](#footnotes-and-references)

## Recommendations

#### A. Keeping schools open should be the default policy. The Government should do everything feasible in order to not close schools. This means:

<!-- -->

1.  Suppressing the virus in the wider community to reduce the risk of
    transmission in schools once at full capacity, and to minimise
    future disruptions to learning; if local outbreaks occur, other
    facilities where the risk of transmission is high (such as pubs or
    gyms) and non-essential shops should be closed, before considering
    school closures;

2.  Providing realistic guidance and substantial extra resources to
    ensure schools can minimise chains of transmission. This includes:
    parental guidance, translated into multiple languages, on when to
    keep their child at home applying the precautionary principle;
    rigorous hygiene rules; distancing and reduced mixing; extra
    teachers, PPE (one or two full PPE sets and provision of cloth face
    coverings for teachers, older children and those with underlying
    heath issues); management of staff rooms, regular testing and
    prioritisation for vaccines for teachers;

3.  Implementing an effective monitoring regime that can cope with the
    likely case load in winter, including broad surveillance, linked to
    an effective, sufficiently scaled and rapid test-trace-isolate
    system, as well as systematic outbreak investigation. This is all
    essential to ensure that schools are re-opened as quickly as
    possible.

#### B. If local full or partial closures must occur, this should be based on clear scenarios with objective criteria:

1.  There must be a set of clear, comprehensible, data-driven and public
    criteria defining each escalation; these could be presented in the
    form of a series of pre-defined local alert levels, and will depend
    on key parameters, such as the number of local cases;

2.  There must be associated plans for each escalation. These need to be
    defined but might look like this:

    1.  Sporadic cases or clusters in the local community: provide
        alerts to local schools and families, test, trace and isolate,
        and where appropriate group isolation.

    2.  Sporadic cases in school: provide alerts, test, trace and
        isolate and group isolation (e.g. class/year);

    3.  Clear clusters in school across year groups: provide alerts,
        consider individual school closure with outbreak control
        response to minimise onward transmission and re-open school as
        quickly as possible;

    4.  Widespread local community transmission: local area lockdown;

    5.  Last resort: national scale closures.

3.  There must be clear responsibility for decision making regarding the
    closing and re-opening of schools. The key agencies are numerous,
    including the schools themselves, Local Authorities and embedded
    public health teams with responsibility for infection prevention and
    control, Public Health England (PHE) and local Health Protection
    Teams, the Joint Biosecurity Centre and the Department for Education
    (DfE). The scope for slow and muddled decision-making is obvious.
    Before September, these agencies need to determine a coherent chain
    of command and responsibility to take effective local decisions.
    While PHE and DfE have set out basic, and separate, criteria for
    school closure, we are clear that a much more joined up and granular
    approach is necessary.

<!-- -->

#### C. The Government should urgently initiate data collection:

<!-- -->

1.  A system, including surveillance studies, must be in place to
    provide decision-makers with the local and timely data they need to
    monitor neighbourhood and school infection rates and to respond
    accordingly. That is, the information structure we set out in A.3
    must be integrated with the decision structure in B.3. For example,
    the minimal data collection from individuals being tested for
    Covid-19 needs to include whether the person being tested is
    connected with a school (as teacher or parent), and if so, which
    school. This information needs to be collated and made available to
    the relevant decision makers charged with monitoring the conditions
    for school closures;

2.  There needs to be a programme of anonymous assessment of education
    achievement and pupil mental health across all age ranges in a
    sample of schools in mid-September, to gauge the extent and nature
    of the learning loss and impacts on student mental health. Tests
    should also be administered at the end of the 2020/21 academic year
    in this sample of schools, to assess any improvement during the
    year;

3.  Given the weak evidence base on both the effectiveness of specific
    strategies in schools to reduce infection risk, as well as the
    adaptions that will be needed to mitigate learning and other losses
    from school closures, we need to encourage experimentation, better
    evaluation and good knowledge exchange mechanisms to share learning
    across the education system.

4.  We further recommend a cost-benefit analysis of widening the
    eligibility for influenza vaccination to secondary-school children
    (or certain age-groups thereof).

<!-- -->

#### D. The Government must establish effective, clear and unified communication with school leaders, teachers and parents to manage opening and closing of schools in response to local conditions. The communication from government to parents should be informed by behavioural science to make sure the messages are salient, clear and consistent.

## Context

School closure affects many outcomes, and these are quantified in
different metrics. Weighing these against each other to reach an overall
decision is crucial. As in other aspects of the COVID-19 response, this
can be expressed as “lives versus livelihoods”. This is true for schools
also: lives saved by closing schools, set against the lost skills, lower
future earnings, and consequent greater poverty. We cannot resolve that
trade-off here but given the need to design policies that do the least
harm, it is essential that we balance any increased risk to life from
schools being open with lives shortened and diminished from greater
poverty due to school closures. ***Our assessment of the evidence
suggests that keeping schools open should be the default position given
the substantial risks from closures.***

While there are many factors to consider when weighing the risks from
closing and opening schools, the core issue is the interplay between two
dynamic processes: infection and learning. Closing or re-opening schools
changes the evolution of both. For infections, school closures may
reduce the effective reproduction number. When the infection rate is
high, this might potentially result in a large reduction in the number
of cases, but when infection rates are low, the reduction in the number
of cases may not justify the costs of school closure.  The learning
process is characterised by dynamic complementarity, meaning that
“learning builds on learning”. Missing some school reduces the child’s
ability to learn the following material. This means that the gap of lost
learning grows at an increasing rate as more and more time is missed
from shut schools. The relative benefits and costs of opening or closing
schools thus depends upon how long schools have been shut, and the local
infection rate.

There are no perfect data to address any of these questions. Much of the
discussion below is based on imperfect and incomplete evidence, though
it should be noted that the evidence on the learning and other losses
from school closures is more robust than that for the impact of schools
on infection rates. This means that some of our recommendations are
cautious and cannot be expressed with as high a level of specificity as
we would normally prefer. Some of our key recommendations are therefore
specific ways in which more data can be collected to better inform
future re-opening and re-closing decisions.

## Schools and infection

#### 1. What happened to infections in other comparable countries when they re-opened schools?

We are able to learn from the experiences of other countries, comparable
to the UK, and track the impact on infection rates of opening schools.
Comparable international data are shown in Figure 1, before and after
school opening. This suggests that, in general, the opening up of
schools has not resulted in notable rises in infection at a national
level. In all the countries reviewed there have been individual school
closures associated with COVID-19 infections in schools, except for in
New Zealand.

We note a number of caveats in interpreting the data. First, in most
countries other interventions were made at the same time, so that any
trends we see may result from a combination of different actions.
Second, in some countries the school opening date was recent and it may
be too soon to see any effect in the data. Third, in most countries,
schools partially opened and a complete return of all pupils may look
different.

#### 2. What protective measures did other comparable countries take in schools, and did they help?

As governments around the world introduced phased opening of schools,
several risk mitigation interventions (e.g. enhanced hygiene measures,
limited interactions, distancing measures, targeted communication
strategies and the use of personal protective equipment) were employed
to reduce transmission of the virus among pupils and staff. 

The type and severity of interventions used vary greatly between
countries. Additionally, it is impossible to assess the impact of
individual mitigation measures because a combination of procedures was
introduced in all settings, and school-level data on interventions and
outcomes is not available.

Most countries employed physical distancing measures in schools until
cases in the community had been suppressed to manageable numbers. In a
few countries, at the time of this writing, distancing measures have
been lifted to allow schools to operate at close to normal capacity,
e.g. in New Zealand, Australia, France, Switzerland and it is critical
that these countries be closely monitored. Furthermore, evidence on
transmission of the virus in school settings and the link between school
attendance rates and the number of new cases of COVID-19 in the UK
should be examined. All these data sets will give us better insight into
infection risk in the school setting.

Additionally, enhanced hygiene measures continue to be implemented in
most countries, although in countries like New Zealand, this has been
greatly relaxed due to successful suppression of the virus. It is
recommended that explicit guidance and additional resources are provided
to local authorities and schools to ensure that the highest level of
hygiene is in place in schools until the winter season has passed, when
it can then be reassessed. Consistency should enable these practices to
become normative.

There is evidence from other settings on the use of masks. If physical
distancing in schools is not possible, masks will play a role in
preventing infection. Given the potentially lower infection risk from
young children, the difficulty of getting young children to wear masks,
and the likely negative impact of masks on their verbal comprehension
and language development, the case for primary school children wearing
masks is not clear. However, older children, all adults in schools, as
well as parents bringing their children into schools, should wear masks.
Masks should also be worn on public transport on the way to school in
line with national guidance.

Given the limited evidence on the effectiveness of specific mitigations,
schools need to try to minimise infection risk using a variety of
methods and need to be resourced accordingly.

#### 3. What is the evidence on the level of risk to children, the prevalence of infection among children, and estimates of the level of transmission in schools between children / from children to adults?

The risks to pupils themselves from Covid-19 infection are very low,
with life-threatening complications for children being very rare indeed.
However, there are risks to school staff, parents/carers and the wider
community. The risks to teachers, parents and carers will vary depending
on age and underlying health conditions, with some (e.g. grandparent
carers) at higher risk than others. Those at higher risk will need to
follow the national guidance in this respect.

Whilst early reports suggested that children were much less susceptible
to infection than adults, the largest-scale sero-surveillance studies in
Europe have so far found only somewhat lower infection-rates in
children, versus adults: viz, infection-rates for children of between
60% and 80% of those in adults (and smaller differences were found in
countries such as Sweden, where schools for under-16s remained open).
The Office for National Statistics (ONS) Infection Survey pilot did
not find significant differences in infection-rates in England, between
different age-groups, but its current estimates on Nucleic Aciden
Amplification Test (NAAT)-positivity-rates in the age-groups 2-9 and
10-19 are based on just eighteen NAAT-positive cases. The evidence-base
on the likelihood of adults infecting children is limited, but between
them, the highest-quality studies suggest that adults may be
approximately half as likely to transmit infection to children in the
same household, as they are to transmit infection to adults in the same
household. There is also weak evidence that children are less likely
than adults to transmit infection to others. 

So far, there are very few data-sets available on school-specific
transmission, but the balance of evidence so far suggests that schools
play only a limited role in overall transmission. This is in marked
contrast with influenza, where there is strong evidence that schools are
an important driver of overall nationwide transmission. The
international data that are available shows at most very limited
transmission in schools where a child was the index case.

There is an important need for targeted data-collection, to determine
more accurately the frequency of transmission from children to adults
and from children to other children (both within schools, and outside),
and to determine more accurately the frequency of transmission from
staff to pupils in schools. We recommend that any outbreak in a UK
school should be followed up by a thorough outbreak investigation,
utilising contact-tracing and NAAT-testing of schoolchildren, school
staff and household contacts of both. Phylogenetic analysis should be
used where appropriate, to investigate probable chains of transmission.

#### 4. Are there significant additional risks for BAME families?

The risk to BAME children, as for other children, is very low indeed.
BAME adults are at higher risk from COVID-19 than other ethnic groups.
The extent of the additional risk for BAME groups varies by age and
pre-existing health conditions. The reasons for the additional risk are
fivefold: they are more likely to work in occupations with higher
exposure, to have worse living conditions, to suffer from
co-morbidities, to access poorer health care and to face discrimination.

Hence some BAME parents, carers and school staff will indeed be at
greater risk due to some of these causal factors and need to follow
national guidance in respect of their particular risk factors. BAME
teachers who do not have these underlying risk factors are likely to be
less at risk than the average BAME adult. This is because they do not
have a major risk factor faced by many BAME people, which is being in a
low-income job.

#### 5. How can we best improve our understanding of schools and infection for the UK? 

The key infection question to be answered is whether re-opening schools
raises the local infection rate. The international evidence (see 1
above) is cautiously optimistic, but we need data precisely tailored to
the UK situation, including data on the prevalence of infection in
schools, and on transmission within schools.

To answer this question, we need to assess the outcome from opening
schools relative to a counterfactual: what would have happened to local
infection rates if schools had remained closed? To do this requires
testing of pupils not returning to school, as well as those who do. June
and July 2020 offered that opportunity, and we hope that similar
circumstances deriving from administrative/institutional decisions will
do so also in September. 

The COVID-19 Surveillance in KIDs (sKID) programme run by PHE, is a
proof-of-concept study that aims to test staff and students in 100
schools this summer mini-half term. An analysis of the sKID data
collection protocol suggests that it will not be able to
conclusively demonstrate a difference in risk for attending school, even
if the risk is double that of non-attendance. This is because the sample
size is too low given the current COVID-19 prevalence in the UK, and
because sKID plans to test only children attending school. A
case-control study of children both in and not in school would allow us
to compare how attending school affects the infection rate in children
whilst taking into account variation in school facilitates, rates of
contact between children outside of school, and regional infection
rates.

Surveillance studies such as sKID do require huge sample sizes to be
effective when infection rates are low, and so responsive testing and
detailed case study analysis of test results (including of phylogenetic
data) from schools which have experienced an infection, may be a more
feasible approach to understanding transmission in schools.

## Schools and learning loss

#### 6. How much learning has been lost, and what is the impact on skill levels from closed schools?

For most pupils in the UK, around 12 weeks of face-to-face learning has
been lost, about a third of a year. This is likely to have a very
significant impact, greater for younger children, given evidence that
investments in children’s learning tend to be complementary over time.

The key methodological challenge is that estimating a causal impact of
school time on skills requires a setting with exogenous variation in the
former. Consequently, the most robust evidence covers the effects of
school closures because of teacher strikes, weather extremes, and other
quasi-random settings.

The most robust studies suggest an impact of between 6%SD to 10%SD, for
the learning loss. This is roughly equivalent to the difference between
being taught by a highly effective teacher for half the year and an
ineffective teacher for half the year, compared to being taught by an
ineffective teacher all year.

Some of this will have been offset by learning at home and the provision
of remote schooling, but this has only been partially effective for most
families. Wide variation in the quantity and quality of remote schooling
and home learning support between pupils and schools underlies much of
the variation in learning loss over this period.

#### 7. Why and how much does learning loss matter? 

The evidence shows that schooling raises skills, and so while
qualifications are in part simply a “signal” of ability, missed school
means lower skills which have real implications for individual lives and
for the economy as a whole.

First, a huge base of evidence shows that earnings depend on skills, and
lower skills means lower earnings. For example, if a student misses a
third of a school year, and each school year brings roughly a 10%
return, earnings potential is likely to be permanently lower by around
3% a year. Students at the lower end of the ability distribution are
more likely to have lost heavily from school closure and are more likely
to be low earners, so will face a significantly higher risk of poverty.
Evidence from the prevalence of teacher strikes in Argentina shows that
exposure to average strike incidence in primary school reduces earnings
in mid-life for women by 1.9% and for men by 3.2%.

At the national level, lower aggregate skills will reduce the growth
rate. The magnitudes are not trivial: 13 cohorts of students have been
affected by the lockdown, so from the mid-2030s for the 50 years
following that, around a quarter of the entire workforce will have lower
skills, with a consequently lower growth rate. The present value of such
a fall in the growth rate is measured in billions not millions. For
example, the study of teacher strikes in Argentina estimates the
aggregate earnings loss in Argentina from lower skills of $2.34 billion
per year.

One of the consequences of lost skills from closed schools is greater
risk of poverty: earlier research from the ONS shows that “those with a
low level of educational attainment are almost five times as likely to
be in poverty now as those with a high level of education”. There is a
huge literature linking poverty to ill health and early death, though
isolating a causal relationship is always difficult. One example shows a
7.9 year gap in life expectancy for women and a 9.7 year gap for men
between the most and least deprived deciles of areas poverty.

#### 8. What is the likely impact on inequality?

The actual loss of learning in the current pandemic will vary by
context, depending in part on what schools and families have been able
to provide in the way of remote schooling. It is very likely that these
gaps in provision have exacerbated existing inequalities between
students from low and high socio-economic status families.

Our analysis of new achievement data from an online learning platform in
the UK shows significant increases in the test score gap between high
and low performers pre- and post-school closure.

The Education Endowment Foundation presents a meta-analysis of the
existing literature. They calculated that school closures will widen the
attainment gap between poor and non-poor families. Their meta-analysis
suggests a median impact of 36% (the range of this estimate is between
11% and 75%) by September 2020.

Differences in parent/carer knowledge and ability to help their
children, differences in parent/carer time available, differences in
availability of quiet study space in the home, differences in the
availability of IT kit and fast internet, and the differences in the
provision of useful material by the school are all correlated with
family income and contribute to growing inequality. This is supported by
a number of high-quality studies undertaken since the beginning of
remote schooling.

From a school perspective, a survey of teachers and Headteachers by NFER
reinforced this view. Most teachers were covering less of the curriculum
than normal, and pupils were doing much less work than normal. Teachers
reported that pupils from poor families were less engaged with their
work. Three-quarters of senior school leaders reported that their
schools were offering ‘social or welfare’ support to vulnerable pupils,
and half reported significant concerns for the safety and wellbeing of
vulnerable pupils.

#### 9. Specifically, what has happened to BAME children? 

Higher levels of educational attainment are correlated with higher
family income and higher parental education. Since BAME pupils on
average come from households with lower levels of income, this in turn
impacts on their education level. According to the ONS, children in
Bangladeshi and Pakistani households were most likely to live in low
income and deprived areas out of all ethnic groups. The relationship
between deprivation and education is the key to understanding life
chances. Children of these ethnic groups with lower levels of income are
more likely to have been significantly badly affected by school
closures. 

GCSE scores shows wide variation within the BAME category. Students of
Asian ethnicity, including but not only Indian and Chinese students, as
well as Black African students, score above White British students,
while Black Caribbean students are about level with White British ones.

There is also evidence to suggest a more positive attitude to learning
and to school in general among some BAME students, particularly those
who are the children of immigrants. This higher level of existing
achievement plus more positive attitudes may to a degree help to offset
the effect of higher poverty levels on the impact of school closures.

#### 10. How can we best improve our understanding of learning loss in the UK? 

We do not currently have direct measures of children’s learning loss as
a result of the school closures. This is clearly a major data gap. The
first step is therefore to collect the necessary test score information
needed to estimate the scale of the learning loss from school lockdown.

Ideal study designs to properly gauge the learning loss from lockdown
are not available. Almost all pupils were undertaking remote schooling,
so there is no natural control group; and a simple longitudinal approach
is not possible because very few schools are testing pupils as this
report is written (early July 2020).

The first date of general testing will be the return to school in
September. Because there is no national, officially sanctioned test for
all age groups at that date in the UK, we recommend an additional test
at the beginning of the academic year and one at the end (the latter to
assess improvements during the year). The burden on schools now and more
so in September will be large, so we also recommend that these tests be
carried out on an anonymous sample of schools, rather than be universal.

For these tests to have any value, there has to be a comparator with the
previous cohort, a “before” benchmark.  Consequently, we recommend using
tests that have a ‘synthetic’ before score – that is, normed tests that
have a known and validated typical score in normal times.

The age-appropriate tests would be taken by pupils of all age groups in
school in September 2020 in samples of schools; ideally, we would pick
different schools per age group to sample a wider range of school
effects, with some useful regional spread. The follow up test would be
administered at the end of the academic year 2020/21. The exact sample
size required depends on the test used but in broad terms it is
estimated that around 150 schools per secondary school age group and
around 600 schools per primary school age group would be required.

## Schools and health

#### 11. What are the other losses for the children from closed schools?

Evidence from the impact of school holidays suggests that children may
be less active and have worse diets as a result of being out of school.

Previous research also suggests that being out of school and more
isolated will impact negatively on children’s mental health. The impact
is likely to be greater for children and young people with pre-existing
mental health conditions and in more socio-economically deprived
households. Social isolation and lack of contact with peers is likely to
be particularly harmful for adolescents.

Evidence from the pandemic on the impact on children’s mental health is
still relatively limited and of variable quality. However, it does
suggest adolescents are particularly negatively affected, as are
vulnerable children, those with particular conditions (e.g. autism) and
children in care. This will have been exacerbated by more limited access
to public services, particularly mental health services.

Establishing the causal impact of shutting and closing schools on
children and young people’s health is challenging methodologically since
lockdown has involved a range of other social restrictions. Proposals
made in this report to measure the impact of school closures on learning
loss (see 10 above) should be extended to measure the impact on child
and adolescent mental health and wellbeing using the same methodology.

## Schools and parental employment and earnings

#### 12. What are the other losses for parents from closed schools? 

In terms of wider impacts, it is clear that children being schooled at
home has had a negative impact on parents’ ability to work, particularly
women. This impact is well documented, though the long-term impact of
these changes is unclear. What is clear is that the ending of the
furlough scheme will significantly sharpen the need for many families to
return their children to school so that they may return to their jobs.
If schools return in September and no further lockdowns occur, it is
conceivable that the impact of school closures on parents’ earnings and
career trajectories will be limited (though clearly there will be an
impact from any downturn in the economy). If, by contrast, schools do
not return full time or we have repeated lockdowns, the impact on
parents’, and particularly women’s, labour market trajectories is likely
to be major.

This in turn affects household income and the greater burdens falling on
low-income families will widen income inequality. It also adversely
affects gender equality in the workplace and in the home. For low-income
families, the loss of income and the degradation of future prospects may
push them in to poverty (noting that one in five children already live
in poverty). Currently around one in five parents in low income
occupations have children and cannot work at home. This group will be
particularly at risk of job losses if schools do not stay open.

#### 13. How can we best improve our understanding of these other losses? 

Open access data sets are coming on stream that can help us monitor the
impact of the lockdown on children and young people’s physical and
mental health, and indeed the employment circumstances of parents.
Longitudinal follow ups are vital if we are to accumulate sufficient
evidence on the impact of lockdown on children and young people’s
health, as well as parental employment and household economic
circumstances.

## Commentary on the Government’s school opening plan

We note the recent (2/7/20) Department for Education (DfE) guidance
regarding school opening in September 2020[^1]. Its recognition of the
significant costs of school closures, as well as the need to minimise
the risks from opening schools, is to be welcomed. Our report supports
the DfE position that all children need to return to face to face
schooling wherever possible and that keeping schools open should be
prioritised. School attendance must indeed be compulsory for the
majority of children (i.e. those who are not at particular risk from
COVID-19) and decisions to open and shut schools must be made on
objective criteria with closures minimised. As we state above, what is
urgently needed are clear and well communicated criteria to guide school
closures and re-openings. This will also help to address teacher, parent
and carer concerns about pupils returning to school.

The DfE guidance provides a lot of specific information for schools on
how they should open and operate, as well as what will be required in
preparation for a potential return to remote teaching during any future
school closures. No doubt this guidance will change as the situation
changes and more evidence emerges as to the effectiveness of different
strategies to minimise infection transmission. Clear, realistic and
timely communication with school leaders and teachers is vital. It is a
major challenge to change ways of working in schools, particularly in a
fast-moving environment with rapidly changing guidance. This needs to be
recognised and guidance kept as simple and stable as possible. Further,
some of the changes that are required of schools will need additional
resource (whether that be in terms of additional staffing or pieces of
PPE and other kit). This too needs to be recognised and an adequate
level of resource provided. The challenge of simultaneously adapting
schools to the safety mitigation procedures required, alongside also
ensuring that adequate provision will be available in the event of
subsequent school closures, should not be underestimated. The DfE
guidance also proposes additional resource to support academic catch up
for pupils who have fallen behind. This will be vitally important if we
are to mitigate some of the increasing inequality in academic
achievement that we are likely to see as a result of the pandemic. The
DfE guidance that schools need to support children’s wellbeing when they
return is also supported by our report. However, again additional
resources will be required. We also recommend *that the Government
develops policies and provides additional resource to support those
students who have experienced learning and other losses from school
closures to ensure they are not disadvantaged over their lifetime. We
need to mitigate the economic scarring that will result from educational
deficits in particular. The Government also needs to consider long term
options to support re-entry to educational opportunity later in life for
those disadvantaged by COVID-19 now*.

## Next steps

There is much we still do not know. Further surveillance and studies are
needed to:

1.  Determine the extent to which children of different ages transmit
    COVID-19, including undertaking school case studies to better
    understand transmission processes;

2.  Understand the effectiveness of different interventions and
    strategies designed to reduce infection transmission in schools,
    including learning from strategies being adopted in other countries;

3.  Measure the learning and other losses from school closures during
    the pandemic; identify successful school interventions to reverse
    the detrimental impact of school closures on learning loss and other
    outcomes;

4.  To address (2) and (3) we need to encourage experimentation, better
    evaluation, and good knowledge exchange mechanisms to share learning
    across the education system.


# Report Findings

## 1. Background

As we move into a phase of continuously reviewing decisions to keep
schools open or shut, we need to recognise there are risks from having
schools open and risks from having schools shut. In open schools, the
risks to pupils themselves from Covid-19 are very low, though there are
risks to school staff, parents and the wider community. Closing schools
causes loss of learning and deterioration in children’s mental and
physical health, for example[^2]. Keeping schools shut increases
inequalities, in both children’s education achievement and their
long-term prospects. The goal of “levelling up” therefore needs schools
to be open. Keeping schools open is also the key to unlocking the rest
of the economy, allowing parents to leave teaching to teachers and
return to their own jobs. The evidence on the infection risk from school
opening is limited, though to date it suggests that the risk from
opening schools, relative to restarting many other activities, is not as
high. The experience of most other countries which have already taken
this step supports this. By contrast, the evidence on the negative
impact of closing schools is considerable and robust.

The report sets out this case in detail. The aim is to provide an
evidence framework for understanding the risks involved in re-opening
and re-closing schools. The key issues are the effect of schools closing
and re-opening on:

-   risks from infection

-   risks from loss of skills and increases in inequality

-   risks to child and parent mental health

-   risks from parents not being able to return to work.

The report addresses each of these in turn, describing first the current
state of knowledge, and second, the steps that we can take to collect
more data specific to the UK. The aims of this report are therefore
two-fold. The first is to summarise existing evidence, including pre
COVID-19 evidence, that can help us understand the *likely* risks of
school opening/closing on infection rates, children’s learning and other
outcomes being affected by the closure of schools. In the absence of
better data, this can help inform policy decisions. As noted above the
quality of the evidence available does vary enormously, depending on the
specific issue being considered. We have not been able to undertake
systematic reviews of the existing literature and we do our best to
guide the reader as to the nature of the evidence and its robustness.
The second aim is to document the data that we do have on the impact of
this crisis in relation to schools and to articulate the kinds of data
collection that are needed to plug gaps in our understanding. There are
of course a number of important issues related to education that we have
not been able to consider in this report. For instance, we need to
ensure that those left behind now in terms of their education
achievement are not disadvantaged forever, and to mitigate the sizeable
economic scarring that will arise from educational deficits. The
Government has already announced some strategies in this respect, more
will be needed. In the longer term it will also need to consider options
to support re-entry to educational opportunity later in life for those
disadvantaged by COVID-19 now. These important long-term term issues
merit further consideration but are not discussed here.

In the UK schools moved to remote teaching and learning in March, except
for key worker children who were permitted to attend in person. Remote
schooling provision has been highly variable in terms of quality, with
some students struggling to access support. Further, remote schooling
cannot easily substitute for the social contact with other adults and
peers that children also get from attending school in person. Despite
the best endeavours of schools, the consequences of children having
minimal or poor quality schooling for such an extended period of time is
likely to be that they miss out on a substantial amount of learning,
have poorer health (particularly mental health) and for some children it
will potentially put them at greater risk of neglect or abuse.
Additionally, the toll on some parents from trying to home school their
children is likely to be substantial, both in terms of parents’
wellbeing and their ability to do their paid work. If children receive
remote schooling on this basis for an even more extended period of time,
these negative impacts will be greater and longer lasting.

In England, some year groups have already returned (or will be
returning) to school during the 2020 summer term. The Government has
also stressed that schools will be open for all children in September
2020, though policies may vary across the countries of the U.K. However,
it is likely that ongoing decisions will need to be made about closing
and reopening schools during the academic year, depending on the
prevalence of the virus. Decisions about schools opening, and indeed
closing again in the event of infection spikes or a second wave, must be
firmly guided by the relative risks of different courses of action.
First, the risk to public health in terms of transmissions and the need
to maintain an effective reproduction number (R<sub>e</sub>) below 1.
Equally such decisions must also involve consideration of the risks of
closure on learning loss and children’s future life chances, as well as
risks for parents’ jobs and earnings.

While there are many factors to consider, the core issue is the
interplay between two dynamic processes: infection and learning. Closing
or re-opening schools changes the evolution of both. For infections,
school closures may reduce the effective reproduction number. When the
infection rate is high, this might potentially result in a large
reduction in the number of cases, but when infection rates are low, the
reduction in the number of cases may not justify the risks and costs of
school closure. The learning process is characterised by dynamic
complementarity, meaning that “learning builds on learning”. Missing
some school reduces the child’s ability to learn the following material.
This means that the gap of lost learning grows at an increasing rate as
more and more time is missed from shut schools. The relative benefits
and costs of opening or closing schools thus depends upon how long
schools have been shut, and the local infection rate.

To help inform such difficult decisions, it is imperative that analysts
have access to good data that can enable robust estimation of the
increase in the infection risk from opening schools, as well as the
negative impact on children’s learning and other outcomes from closing
schools. Currently we have insufficient high-quality data on both these
elements, an issue which needs to be urgently addressed. Further,
decisions about opening and closing schools are likely to need to be
made at a local level, in response to spikes of infection in some
localities. Hence there is also a need for effective surveillance
mechanisms and for data to be available at the local area level. The UK
is also not alone in facing these decisions. Almost every other country
also closed their schools. Likewise, most countries are currently
drawing up plans to open their schools, and many have indeed opened
schools already. We can learn from the experience of other countries and
international collaboration and sharing of data is vital. Lastly,
another focus of this report is on how schools can open safely with
infection mitigations in place. Yet we have very limited robust evidence
on the effectiveness of any such mitigations. Prospective studies should
try to evaluate not only the infection risks from opening schools but
also the impact of different mitigations: again we might learn much from
considering what other countries are doing.

## 2. Opening Schools Safely

In this section, we summarise the guidance provided by intergovernmental
organisations on schools during the COVID-19 pandemic, the emerging
evidence on transmission of the virus, the approaches adopted by select
countries to reopen schools and the data required to allow schools to
manage school operations during this pandemic.

### a. Intergovernmental Guidance

   In March, the World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations
   International Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the International
   Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) provided
   detailed high-level guidance on the prevention and control of
   COVID-19 in schools[^3]. In this report, a checklist of core
   non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) such as, enhancing hygiene,
   improving airflow and providing clear communication on the risks of
   COVID-19 was provided. In addition, the WHO’s Public Health and
   Social Measures Annex on schools- published in May[^4]-recommended
   that governments should adopt a risk-based approach to determine
   if, when and how schools readmit pupils. It also suggested that
   decision-makers should be informed on the latest evidence on
   transmission of SARS-CoV-2 among children and the severity in
   children, the local situation and epidemiology of COVID-19 where
   schools are located and the school setting and ability to maintain
   COVID-19 prevention and control measures. In this guide, a more
   detailed list of NPIs was provided, including case management, one
   metre distancing measures, limited class sizes, staggered start and
   end times, leveraging outdoor space, the use of “tele-schooling”
   and developing a policy to ensure masks or face coverings are worn
   in line with national or local guidance<sup>3,p.4</sup>. In June,
   UNICEF, the World Bank, the World Food Programme and UNHCR provided
   a framework to help governments choose the policies that are most
   suitable locally[^5]. The United Nations Educational, Scientific,
   and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), the World Bank and other
   international groups have also provided additional guidance to
   Ministries of Education across the globe.

### b. Schools and infections

Evidence on COVID-19 prevalence among children, illness severity among
children, transmission from adults to children and from children to
adults, and transmission in schools.

While there are still gaps in the evidence-base, and better-quality
studies are continually emerging, the available evidence
(internationally) indicates that we can draw the following conclusions
at this time.

*There is good evidence that the prevalence of Covid-19 infection
among children has generally been either similar to the prevalence
among adults, or lower, in the UK and internationally*. More data are
required to judge whether prevalence in the UK is significantly lower
among children than among adults, or whether prevalence is similar
among children to among adults. We proceed to outline the evidence.

Firstly, we observe that the ONS Infection Survey pilot[^6] (for
England) has not found a statistically significant difference between
rates of NAAT-positivity in children, versus in adults, with nine out of
3,117 children aged 2-11 testing positive (NAAT-positivity rate 0.29%;
95% CI: 0.13% to 0.55%), and nine out of 2,860 individuals aged 12-19
testing positive (NAAT-positivity rate 0.31%; 95% CI: 0.14% to 0.60%),
between 26<sup>th</sup> April and 27<sup>th</sup> June. These should be
compared to NAAT-positivity rates of 0.42% (95% CI: 0.31% to 0.56%) in
the age-group 20-49, and 0.28% (95% CI: 0.20% to 0.39%) in the age-group
50-69. However, the confidence intervals for the different age-groups
remain wide, due to the low rates of NAAT-positivity. Hence, more data
are required for us to judge accurately whether prevalence in England is
significantly lower among children than among adults, or whether
prevalence is similar. The ONS data do, however, provide good evidence
that the rate of NAAT-positivity in children in England, between
26<sup>th</sup> April and 27<sup>th</sup> June, was not much higher than
that in adults.

We do not yet have reliable age-specific seroprevalence data for
England. However, the very large Spanish ENE-COVID seroprevalence
survey[^7] found a statistically significant difference between
seroprevalence levels in children versus in adults, with that in
children being lower. This was a survey of 61,075 individuals between
27th April and 11th May; one of the highest-quality seroprevalence
studies to date, worldwide. From this survey, seroprevalence in children
in Spain aged 5-9 was estimated at 3.1% (95% CI: 2.2%-4.2%); in children
aged 10-14 at 4.0% (95% CI: 3.1%-5.0%), and for those aged 15-19 at 3.7%
(95% CI: 2.9%-4.8%). This compares with an overall population
seroprevalence estimate of 5.0% (95% CI: 4.7% to 5.4%), for the Spanish
population as a whole. The Spanish lockdown was particularly stringent
for children, with under-14s not allowed to leave their homes between
14th March and 25th April; however, it was also stringent for adults -
who, with the exception of key workers, were only allowed to leave their
homes to buy essential supplies, or in the case of an emergency.
Moreover, many COVID-19 infections in Spain will have been contracted
before the lockdown was imposed (14th March), i.e. when most schools and
workplaces were still open.

There are also relevant prevalence data from Italy. Following the first
death from Covid-19 in Italy, in the municipality of Vò, more than 85%
of the population of Vò was NAAT-tested in late February, and no
positive cases were found among the 217 children aged 10 or under who
were tested (NAAT-positivity rate 0.0%; 95% CI: 0.0% to 1.7%), despite
73 out of the 2,812 people tested (NAAT-positivity rate 2.6%; 95% CI:
2.0% to 3.3%), testing NAAT-positive[^8]. Among the 250 individuals aged
11-20 who were tested, three tested positive (NAAT-positivity rate 1.2%;
95% CI: 0.25% to 3.5%). The start of the two-week lockdown in Vò
coincided with the testing; schools had been open up until that point.

In some countries, most schools were kept open throughout the pandemic.
Iceland has kept schools for under-16s open throughout the pandemic,
though it closed upper secondary schools (for those aged 16 and above),
from 13th March until 4th May. Population screening in Iceland[^9] in
early April found no SARS-CoV-2 NAAT-positive children under 10 years
old, out of the 848 tested (NAAT-positivity rate 0.0%; 95% CI: 0.0% to
0.43%), as compared with 100 testing positive out of the 12,232 tested
persons of aged 10 or older (NAAT-positivity rate 0.8%; 95% CI: 0.7% to
1.0%). Iceland, however, has had low prevalence across all age-groups.

Sweden has also kept most schools for under-16s open, though high
schools (for those aged 16 and above), and universities, were advised to
close and switch to distance learning, from 18th March, and local
decisions could be taken to close schools for younger children
thereafter, in the case of local outbreaks. According to an
announcement[^10] by the Swedish Public Health Agency, a medium-sized
(n=1,104) seroprevalence survey in Sweden found that by the end of
April, 4.9% of those aged 0-19 tested positive for SARS-CoV-2
antibodies, compared to 6.7% of those aged 20-64. The full results of
this survey have yet to be published (even in preprint form).

*Overall, we can say that the risk to children arising from Covid-19
infection is low.* We can be essentially certain that the risk of death
and of severe illness from Covid-19 infection in children is extremely
low. Specifically, the infection fatality rate for children aged 5-14 is
estimated at 14 per million (95% CI: 6.6 per million to 24 per
million)[^11]. This is lower than the infection fatality rate of
seasonal influenza among children aged 5-17 during the 2018-19 ‘flu
season in the United States, which was estimated by the CDC at 28 per
million[^12], and is substantially lower than the overall population
infection fatality rate of Covid-19, which is approximately 13 per
thousand for the UK (95% CI: 11 per thousand to 15 per thousand) [^13].
As of 23rd June, only five COVID-linked deaths of UK children under the
age of 18 had been recorded, and we are only aware of one such death in
which no pre-existing health condition was known. Severe illness is also
much rarer in children than in adults. The percentage of symptomatic
cases requiring hospitalisation is estimated[^14] to be 0.1% among
children aged 0-9 and 0.3% among those aged 10-19, compared to an
overall population hospitalisation rate of 4.4%, for the UK. A recent
SJD (Barcelona) study[^15], following 724 children living in the
household of a confirmed Covid-19 case, found that more than 99% of the
children in the study who subsequently tested positive, had only mild
symptoms.

An extremely rare but severe Kawasaki-like multisystem inflammatory
condition has been linked to SARS-CoV-2 infection in children. When
linked to SARS-CoV-2 infection in under-18’s, this condition is known as
‘Paediatric Inflammatory Multisystem Syndrome Temporally associated with
SARS-CoV-2’, or PIMS-TS. The Royal College of Paediatrics and Child
Health estimated that, by early June, there had been approximately 200
cases of PIMS-TS in the UK among under-18’s[^16]. The most comprehensive
UK study of this syndrome to date (of which we are aware) is that of
Davies et al[^17]. This was a multicentre observational study of all
children admitted to 19 participating Paediatric Intensive Care Units
(PICUs) in the UK between 1<sup>st</sup> April and 10<sup>th</sup> May,
who fulfilled the case-definition of PIMS-TS. There are a total of 23
PICUs in the UK, of which two were closed during the study period,
having been converted into ICUs for adults due to Covid-19, so it can be
expected that this study covered at least 90% of cases admitted to PICUs
in the UK. There were 78 cases admitted to the 19 participating PICUs in
this 40-day period; two of these children died. The median age of all
these patients was 11 years. Only 22% tested NAAT-positive for
SARS-CoV-2; the other 78% tested NAAT-negative; but 24/25 (96%) of
NAAT-negative patients who also underwent a serological test, tested IgG
serology-positive for SARS-CoV-2, indicating prior infection with
SARS-CoV-2. These data represent an ICU-admission rate (for PIMS-TS) of
approximately 1.1 children per million, per week, during the 40-day
period of the study. While still being an extremely rare event, children
of Black and Asian ethnicities were more likely to be affected; for
children of black ethnicity, the ICU-admission rate per week was about
6.3 children per million per week, and for children of Asian ethnicity,
the rate was 4.3 per million per week. For comparison, in 2018, there
were 26 ICU admissions per week per million children, in the UK (all
causes).[^18]

*In view of the above, we can be essentially certain that Covid-19
infection typically produces milder symptoms in children, than in
adults.* This means that the risk of severe disease is less in
children, but also that children may more often carry the disease
without detection. The proportion of children who are truly asymptomatic
(as opposed to pre-symptomatic or pauci-symptomatic, at a given time)
remains unknown. Data from Italian emergency departments suggested that
21% of SARS-CoV-2 NAAT-positive children were asymptomatic at the time
of testing, but there was no follow-up to determine whether these
children later developed symptoms; some could therefore have been
pre-symptomatic. Other studies have found comparable figures, but we are
not aware of any such study where follow-up was performed.

*The balance of the available evidence suggests that children may be
less susceptible to infection than adults, given the same level of
exposure.* Four high-quality studies found odds-ratios for secondary
attack ratios of children, versus adults of 0.16 (95% CI:
0.06-0.46)[^19]; 0.27 (95% CI: 0.13-0.55)[^20], 0.21 (95% CI:
0.11-0.41)[^21] and 0.34 (95% CI: 0.24-0.49)[^22], though one
high-quality study, of Bi et al[^23], found no significant difference,
with an odds-ratio of 0.82 (95% CI: 0.48-1.43). The very high-quality
study of Zhang et al,2222 which found an odds-ratio of 0.34, excluded
spouses for this purpose, and also considered only primary cases who
were quarantined after diagnosis in local government facilities.

The study of Q.-L. Jing et al[^20] also contained ten primary cases under
the age of 20. The overall secondary attack rate for these cases was
estimated at only 5.2% for household contacts (95% CI: 2.4% to 9.7%),
and at only 1.4% for non-household contacts (95% CI: 0.04% to 7.6%). For
primary cases between the ages of 20 and 59 (of whom there were 145 in
the study), the corresponding secondary attack rates were 14.8% (95% CI:
11.7% to 18.4%) for household contacts, and 2.2% (95% CI: 1.4% to 3.4%)
for non-household contacts. This indicates that children may be less
likely than adults to transmit COVID-19 infection, though studies with a
larger number of children as primary cases are needed, to be more
certain of this conclusion.

So far, there is limited evidence available for quantifying the extent
to which schools contribute to overall nationwide transmission of
Covid-19, partly as many countries closed schools early on in their
epidemics. The balance of evidence available so far suggests that
*schools play only a limited role in overall transmission*[^24]. This
is in contrast with influenza, where there is strong evidence that
transmission among children in schools is an important driver of overall
transmission[^25],[^26]. We outline some of the evidence below.

One of the most extensive studies for which results are available was a
contact-tracing study[^27] across 15 schools in New South Wales,
Australia, from 5th March to 3rd April. This study involved 18 initial
cases (nine children and nine teachers) who had opportunities to infect
others. It indicated very limited transmission in a school setting, with
just two likely secondary cases arising, both being students (one in a
primary school, where the likely primary case was a teacher; and one in
a high school, where the two likely primary cases were students). In
detail, the six initial cases in primary schools (five staff and one
pupil, across five schools) were judged to have 168 close contacts
between them; of these contacts, 137 were pupils and 31 were staff. Just
one additional case was detected, though in some cases, contacts were
only tested if they developed COVID-like symptoms, so only 32% (53 out
of 168) of contacts were tested (indicating a risk of possible
undercounting of asymptomatic secondary cases). In the primary school
where the single additional case was found, there was just one initial
case (a staff-member). In that school, 21 close contacts of the initial
case underwent serological testing; no other additional cases were
found. A review found that it was most likely (but not certain) that
this additional case (a pupil) was infected in the school environment,
i.e. it was likely to be a secondary case corresponding to transmission
from the primary case in that school (who, as mentioned above, was a
staff-member). The 12 initial cases in high schools (8 students and 4
staff), were judged to have 695 close contacts between them, of whom 598
were students and 12 were staff. Only one additional case was detected
(a student). Nose/throat swabs were taken from one third (235 out of
695) of these close contacts, for NAAT-testing; all of these tested
negative. In one high school, where there were two initial cases (both
students), 75 close contacts underwent antibody testing one month after
contact with one (or both) of the two initial cases. Just one of these
contacts (a student) tested positive.

During February and March, the nationwide test-trace-isolate programme
in Singapore detected (through NAAT-testing of contacts of confirmed
cases in the wider community), three index cases of Covid-19 in schools,
as described in the study of Yung et al[^28]. One was a pre-school
student, aged 5, another a secondary school student, aged 12, and the
third was a pre-school teacher. *Only the third index case (a teacher)
is thought to have caused any secondary cases, and no secondary cases
were detected among students.* In the first two cases, the students in
question were found to be NAAT-positive from contact-tracing following
their exposures to adult household-members who were part of a community
cluster. Both students attended their respective schools on the first
day of their symptoms, before being subsequently diagnosed with Covid-19
and isolated in hospital. No secondary cases were detected in either of
these two schools. All close contacts of the index cases (including all
classmates) were placed under a 14-day quarantine and requested to
monitor their symptoms; those who were not deemed close contacts were
permitted to continue with classes, and asked to monitor themselves for
possible symptoms; they were admitted for Covid-19 evaluation if they
became unwell during the subsequent 14 days. Eight students from the
secondary school developed COVID-like symptoms during the 14-day period
and were NAAT-tested, but all tested negative. Similarly, 34 student
contacts from the pre-school developed COVID-like symptoms during the
14-day period and were NAAT-tested; all tested negative. However, in the
preschool setting where the primary case was a teacher, 16 other cases
of Covid-19 infection were confirmed among adult staff-members in the
preschool, with an additional 11 cases subsequently being discovered in
their households. A total of 77 children from this preschool (73% of all
students) underwent NAAT-testing; all tested negative. The remaining 27%
who chose not to provide a swab, did not develop any symptoms while
under close monitoring and quarantine.

Finally, the study of Heavey et al[^29], of all reported COVID-19 cases
in Irish schools from 1<sup>st</sup> March to 13<sup>th</sup> March,
found six index cases (three students and three teachers), but no
secondary cases were detected in school settings, despite 1,155 school
contacts of these six index cases being identified. The only detected
(probable) secondary case was in an adult, not in a school setting. (We
remark that only those contacts displaying any possible symptoms,
including mild symptoms, were NAAT-tested, so some asymptomatic
secondary cases might have gone undetected.) According to the report,
the available epidemiological data for all six index cases indicated
that they had not been infected with SARS-CoV-2 in the school setting.

We note that there have been some other studies and media reports
concerning COVID-19 outbreaks in schools, for example, at a school in
Oise (Northern France)[^30], at Gymnasia Rehavia middle and high school
in Jerusalem (Israel)[^31], and in a school in Santiago (Chile)[^32].
However, in the schools in Oise and Jerusalem, it is unclear whether the
initial cases were pupils or staff; in the school in Santiago there is
good evidence that the index-cases were parents or teachers and that
transmission took place during a week of parent-teacher evenings; and in
the schools in Oise and Santiago there appears to be no evidence that
transmission took place within the schools (excepting in the
parent-teacher evenings in the school in Santiago). We are not aware of
any official outbreak report or academic study on the Gymnasia Rehavia
(Jerusalem) middle and high school outbreak.

1.  *Particular risks from infection for BAME families and teachers*

Risks from COVID-19 are higher for some groups than others, for example
varying by age and underlying health conditions. Clearly, as in other
professions, care will be needed when opening schools to consider the
health risks, and necessary mitigations, for older teachers and those
who have been sheltering with particular underlying health conditions. A
key question when opening schools is also whether teachers and parents
from BAME groups[^33] may be at particular risk and hence whether this
should be taken into consideration when making decisions about school
opening/closing.

The issues Black, Asian, and Minority ethnic groups are facing in the
U.K. mirror those seen among minorities in the United States. According
to the latest Public Health England report, Black, Asian, and Minority
Ethnic populations have been disproportionately impacted by COVID-19.
Five possible factors contribute to the increased vulnerability of
members of the BAME community: Occupation, Living Conditions,
Comorbidities, Healthcare Bias/accessibility, and Discrimination.

BAME families are overrepresented in low wage jobs and overcrowded
areas, making them more vulnerable to COVID-19. BAME households are
often extended and multigenerational cohabiting families[^34]. In
England, Black people are nearly four times as likely as white people to
have no access to outdoor space[^35]. Higher proportions of BAME people
live in deprived areas of London and more likely to have concerns over
safety and security. Due to these living conditions, when one member of
the family contracts COVID-19, is it highly likely the rest of the
family will contract the virus. The most deprived areas of England and
Wales had more than double the number of COVID-19 related deaths than
the least deprived areas (58 deaths per 100,000)[^36].

Studies have linked comorbidities to poorer COVID-19 outcomes,
specifically hypertension, and diabetes[^37],[^38]. Previous studies
have shown that Black and South Asian populations in the U.K. have three
to five times the prevalence of type-two diabetes compared to the white
people and are diagnosed at a younger age[^39]. Comorbidities are not
only a risk for BAME adults but also children from BAME backgrounds. In
a small London U.K. study by Harman et al., 80 percent of children
admitted to the hospital were from BAME backgrounds with
comorbidities[^40]. Studies in the United States and Canada showed that
80 percent of the children admitted to pediatric intensive care units
had underlying chronic diseases: immune suppression, obesity, diabetes,
seizures, or chronic lung disease[^41]<sup>.</sup> Teachers and children
from BAME backgrounds who have pre-existing conditions should certainly
be risk assessed before returning to school settings.

Historically racial and ethnic minority patients have reported unequal
treatment by physicians[^42]. When they go to the doctor, they are less
likely to receive medication for the same injuries as their white
counterparts[^43]<sup>,</sup>[^44]. Some BAME individuals may also be
disadvantaged if medical advice is not translated into the relevant
language, an issue that is clearly very relevant during this pandemic
during which advice has been complex and changing. People from BAME
backgrounds have also reported that doctors are less likely to take
their complaints seriously. Systematic racism has created the conditions
for minorities to be positioned to be disproportionately affected by
COVID-19. Black and Minority Ethnic persons are regulated to poor
neighbourhoods and low wage risky jobs, leaving them more exposed to the
virus. Black people are more likely to be unemployed, suspended from
school, and searched by the police[^45]<sup>.</sup> Not only does racism
create disadvantaged positions, but it also increases their risk of
hypertension and diabetes. David Williams’ Everyday Discrimination scale
shows that people who experience racism and discrimination have a higher
risk of hypertension and diabetes due to high levels of stress hormones
remaining in the body for an extended period[^46].

### c. International evidence on schools reopening

The risks from school opening depend of course on the mitigations to
reduce infection that schools put in place. This is new territory for
schools and there is a critical need to understand from other countries
how schools can open safely at close to full attendance. Robust evidence
on effective mitigations is however, limited.

Although, approximately 107 countries had implemented temporary school
closures by 18th March 2020, multiple countries around the world have
opened schools for face-to-face teaching with varying control
measures[^47]. A review of the approaches used by countries which are at
more advanced stages of the outbreak or who have lower cases of COVID-19
may offer lessons for the UK. In this summary, the school policies used
in seven countries were analysed: Germany, France, Spain, Italy,
Denmark, Israel, New Zealand, and Australia (see Appendum TD1 for detailed
country profiles). Other countries that used notably different
interventions are also noted.

The education response has been relatively haphazard in a number of
countries, including in high-income countries who are not used to
contingency planning or intersectoral planning and response. This has
resulted in some confusion for schools, parents and children, resulting
in changed plans at short notice, e.g. when schools would operate at
full capacity in Germany, France, Spain and the UK. Certainly, there is
still a need for clear guidance on *how* to open schools more safely and
summaries of best practices have been developed[^48]. It is also evident
that over the course of the outbreak, as evidence was generated,
countries have adopted largely similar approaches to reopening.

Governments across the globe were keen to open up schools as quickly as
possible to ensure minimal loss of, learning, reduce indirect health
harms and ensure that parents could re-join the workforce. However,
shutdown periods that involved no teaching – virtual or in-person -
varied greatly in time across the globe. Some countries only closed
schools for three weeks, e.g. Denmark, while others were shut for seven
weeks or more, e.g. in Italy and Spain. Although a few countries
controversially kept schools physically open throughout the outbreak,
e.g. Sweden and Australia, local governments, local authorities, or
school boards implemented closures to varying extents to allow for
physical distancing measures.

All countries reviewed in this summary have implemented a phased return
to in-person teaching, including in Australia and Sweden (see Table 1,
Technical Document 1). In most countries, the children of key workers
and the youngest children requiring most supervision were able to return
to school before their peers. In Israel and France children with
disabilities were also the first to return to schools. The decision to
prioritise younger pupils – because as discussed in section 3 the early
years are fundamental to reducing educational inequalities and to allow
parents to return to work – is a political and economic one. A few
countries also prioritised the return of the oldest children who were
taking official exams, e.g. in Germany and Israel.

Many of these countries are still operating at partial capacity,
leveraging rotating schedules to allow for distancing measures to be
employed in schools, e.g. in Germany, Denmark, and Israel. However, with
emerging evidence pointing to a relatively low incidence and
transmission rates of COVID-19 among children and the success that many
of these countries have had in suppressing the virus, some have started
to operate at close to normal capacity with no distancing measures in
place, e.g. in France, the Netherlands, Switzerland, New Zealand, and
Australia. Denmark and Germany will also be operating at full capacity
from August, at the start of their 2020-21 school year. In some
countries, schools are also trying to optimise the use of the summer to
make up for lost teaching time during the lockdown. In New Zealand and
Thailand, the dates of holidays for the remainder of the calendar year
have been modified.

In contrast, some countries with some of the highest total number of
cases and deaths from COVID-19 are leveraging distanced-learning until
they have sufficient time to prepare to operate with full attendance in
schools, e.g. Spain and Italy who plan to operate at full capacity from
September.

Distancing measures were in place in all countries until very recently.
Given the difficulties around maintaining physical distancing, schools
have been using innovative strategies to ensure they can keep staff and
children well separated (see summary in Table 2, Technical Document 1).
These typically involved a minimum distancing length of 1-2m, a maximum
number of pupil per classroom, staggered start, finish and break times,
one way systems outside of classrooms, assigned desks, and outdoor or
off-site learning in places with better ventilation and more space. In
Denmark, open spaces, and unused spaces such as a football stadium are
being used for teaching purposes. This approach is particularly useful
for heavily populated big cities with a large number of children per
classroom. It is important to note that these distancing measures are
only feasible while most pupils continue to work from home. As countries
start to operate schools at full capacity, distancing becomes more
difficult and infection rates must be monitored to understand if a
setting with no distancing will increase transmissions among children or
not.

Multiple other public health measures are being used to suppress the
virus. All schools have set-up enhanced facilities for cleaning school
property and for regular handwashing, although this no longer being
implemented in New Zealand and Australia. In schools that have opened,
only Germany, France, Spain and Israel are mandating the use of masks,
typically for older age groups or when they are travelling or mixing
with others or cannot practice sufficient physical distancing. In
Norway, staff members at schools are asked to disinfect classrooms and
toys twice a day.

The approach to case management in schools is not entirely clear and, in
many countries, appears suboptimal. Evidence to date points to low
transmission rates among children, and so most countries are only
testing symptomatic children in schools. Symptomatic children are
isolated, and, in some cases, authorities are notified, but not always.
In contrast, in Israel, a positive case results in the whole school
being tested. In Israel and a few other countries, parents have to sign
a health form confirming their child and/or family members do not have
COVID-19 before being permitted into school. In Beijing, students fill
out a survey on an app that calculates their risk of infection. If the
risk is too high, they cannot attend school physically. In Shanghai,
some schools have designated rooms to isolate students with fever. Other
policies are detailed in the tables below and include the use of
partitions in classrooms when distancing is not a possibility, e.g. in
Spain from September, decluttering classrooms in Australia, not allowing
physical contact or toys or lunches to be brought in from home in
Israel.

For the schools that have opened at close to full capacity, there is
little data on the impact on the transmission of the virus. In all the
countries reviewed there have been individual school closures associated
with infections in schools, except for in New Zealand. Israel and France
have experienced the most serious outbreaks, although the number of new
cases (70-300) is relatively low compared to the number of active cases
in the UK. In Israel, the clusters have appeared linked to multiple
schools across the country resulting in total school closures; some
reports suggest that 12% of new cases were detected in a school setting
though this does not imply that the school was the source of the
infection. A senior source in Israel has suggested that local experts
believe that transmission of the virus is typically from adults to
children. However, this remains unclear without data stratified by age,
and regular monitoring of infections in symptomatic and asymptomatic
children.

The partial readmission of children into schools across the globe has
mostly coincided with a wider sector reopening e.g. of businesses where
employees cannot work from home and increased use of transport. This has
made it difficult to monitor the impact of schools opening on infection
rates. However, assessing the number of new COVID-19 cases in each
country before and after schools opened may give some insight into
whether school settings have any impact on the number of COVID-19 cases
or not. Although most countries did not experience a significant
increase in COVID-19 cases after schools reopened, cases in Israel have
more than doubled in the 50-day period since schools opened. The
increase in cases has largely been associated with children between the
ages of 10-19 years[^49] (source). Figure 1 below shows the 7-day
cumulative number of confirmed COVID-19 cases for 10 different
countries[^50]. The x-axis gives the number of days since schools began
to open, starting 60-days prior to opening. The overlaid line is a loess
smooth of the raw count data. Caution is required in interpreting these
plots: most countries implemented incremental openings (for example, in
the UK only a small number of year groups started attending on 1 June);
other social-distancing measures may have been implemented or relaxed
during this time and are not shown; even if within schools transmission
is rife, it may take several weeks for an increase in cases to become
visible. The plots suggest that school openings have not been followed
by a large immediate spike in case numbers, but that the rate of
decrease in case numbers may have stalled. Statistically estimating the
effect of opening/closing schools on the infection rate has proven
difficult, in large part because countries have tended to implement or
relax a variety of NPIs simultaneously[^51]<sup>.</sup>


<img src="/diagrams/schools/image1.png" style="width:100%" />

**Figure 1. Case numbers following school openings**


### d. Key Interventions for Schools in the UK

1.  *Implementing Further School Closures*

Although, nationwide school closures were implemented as cases of
COVID-19 surged around the world, once pupils were readmitted –
typically in phased fashion and with reduced capacity – national
closures were not reintroduced. Once the virus has successfully been
contained – or better suppressed or eliminated –, then flare-ups are
dealt with rapidly on a local scale. For example, in Germany, localised
closures are being implemented at varying levels in line with the number
of infections. In mid-to-late June all schools and daycare centres in
the German district of Gütersloh closed after an outbreak of 400-657
cases at a local meat factory[^52]. In contrast, several schools in
Magdeburg, Saxony-Anhalt were closed after an accumulation of
approximately 60 new cases in a few days<sup>63</sup>. In May, a single
primary school in Wuppertal, North Rhine-Westphalia was forced to close
after new infections were detected[^53]. Finally, in the Bavarian
district of Neu-Ulm, 98 children and adults were sent to quarantine
after COVID-19 cases were found in three primary school classes and a
kindergarten group, but the rest of the school remained open[^54].
Additionally, in Israel, the Education Ministry director-general asked
schools to prepare for three scenarios from the start of the school year
in September, depending on the number of COVID-19 cases detected[^55].
In the best-case scenario, schools will operate at full capacity.
Although, middle schools and high schools will combine in-person and
remote learning, while elementary and kindergarten students will
continue with the existing framework, with added health regulations. In
a second scenario, older students from fifth to twelfth grades will
study remotely, while their younger peers in first to fifth grades are
divided into smalls groups in schools, allowing distancing to be
implemented. Only preschool students will remain in full-size classrooms
with enhanced hygiene. Finally, in a worst-case scenario, all children,
including pre-schoolers will split into small groups too. Local middle
and high schools will be used to accommodate them with additional
staffing<sup>66</sup>.

It is critical that the UK Government provides clear guidance on how
schools will manage any future surges in cases and under what
circumstances. We have provided an example set of scenarios and actions
in the Recommendations section. In some countries reviewed, the criteria
for closures and responsibility of decision making is not clear. It is
essential that we learn from this and provide clear guidance and
determine a coherent chain of command and responsibility to take
effective local decisions.

1.  *Face coverings in Schools*

The use of face coverings or face shields has not been recommended in
the Government’s guidance for schools unless children or staff display
symptoms of COVID-19 and if “direct personal care” must be administered
on school grounds.

Although its use in younger children may not be practical or effective –
emerging evidence suggests that there may be less viral transmission
from children to adults and that the dominant mechanism in young
children may not be from breathing, coughing or sneezing (see section
3b) - its use should be considered for all adults (teachers,
non-teaching staff and parents at school) and older children in schools,
especially if there is a high rate of viral transmission locally and
physical distancing is not possible[^56]. In line with the Government’s
guidance, this should include its use if public or school transport is
used to travel to school.

The DELVE report on masks published in May recommends the use of face
masks or face coverings to reduce onward transmission where physical
distancing is not possible, especially in crowded places. This is based
on the emerging scientific evidence that shows a decrease in the rate of
coronavirus infections where mask-use is compulsory and its usefulness
in limiting how far breath can travel<sup>24</sup>. This advice should
not be ruled out for schools.

Although not all countries in our international review appeared to make
use of masks or face coverings in their schools, those with a relatively
high number of COVID-19 cases recommended its use in areas where
distancing is not possible or where mixing outside of class groups
occurred, e.g. in some classrooms, hallways and on transport, in for
example France, Switzerland and in Israel. More recently, in the US, the
American Academy of Pediatrics and the Centers for Disease Control (CDC)
have recommended the tailored use of masks and face coverings when
schools open at full capacity in Autumn[^57]<sup>,</sup>[^58]. The CDC
has advised schools to teach and reinforce the use of cloth face
coverings for staff and children –again, older children in particular –
except those under the age of two years, those who are unable to remove
the mask without assistance and those with breathing challenges.

There is some concern that the use of masks will impede learning.
Research has previously shown that the observation of the face,
including the mouth is an important tool for learning and language
development[^59]<sup>,</sup>[^60]. While this is important for young
children, the use of face coverings will likely provide greater benefit
at less risk to language development for older children in secondary
schools.

1.  *Winter challenges*

The 2020-21 winter ‘flu season will pose challenges for monitoring and
responding to possible COVID-19 in schools, and this should be
considered in planning for the Autumn and Winter terms of 2020-21.

Firstly, two of the most common symptoms of COVID-19 (namely, a high
fever and a new, continuous cough) can also be symptoms of seasonal
influenza. Hence, as has been widely recognised[^61], there is a risk
that symptoms of seasonal influenza will be mistaken for symptoms of
COVID-19, and vice versa. Other viruses commonly contracted by
school-aged children, for example rhinoviruses, can also exhibit
symptoms that can be mistaken for COVID-19. This will make monitoring
and outbreak response harder in the case of COVID-19, from late Autumn
until Spring. For example, a child may contract influenza and develop a
high fever or a new cough on the morning of a school day; the child’s
parents may then believe (based on the symptoms) that the child is
experiencing the onset of COVID-19. If the child’s parents are following
NHS guidelines, they will then keep the child at home; they may also
telephone the school reporting that the child has COVID-like symptoms. A
similar problem could occur if pupils contract influenza and develop
symptoms (while at school) which are then mistaken for COVID-19
symptoms, so that they are sent home with suspected COVID-19, whereas in
fact they are suffering from influenza. If this happens for several
children in the same school, it may be believed (wrongly) that there is
a COVID-19 outbreak in the school, possibly precipitating partial or
full closure. The problem will exacerbated if there is a delay in such
children being NAAT-tested for COVID-19, or if the results of
NAAT-testing take longer than 24 hours to be received. On the other
hand, there is also a risk that children who contract COVID-19 may be
believed (wrongly) to have influenza and not COVID-19, leading to a
failure to test them for COVID-19, or a delay in doing so. This could
increase the risk of delays in the detection of COVID-19 outbreaks.

To mitigate against these risks, schools and parents and guardians
should be provided with adequate and timely NAAT-testing for COVID-19 –
to enable prompt testing after a need has been identified, with a rapid
turnaround time between testing and getting the results. To do this, the
Government will need to ensure that sufficient resourcing – testing
kits, labour consumables etc. – is made available in preparation for the
winter. There may also be an argument for advising that the result of
any NAAT test, when performed for a school-aged child, be reported
(along with the school attended by the child) by the testing site (after
requesting the parent to provide the name of the school), if at all
possible.

Additionally, parents should be encouraged to promptly test children
with symptoms and report the results of testing. A COVID-19 winter
preparation public information campaign targeting parents and schools
should be considered.

Finally, as is argued in the recent report of the Academy of Medical
Sciences<sup>61</sup>, there is also a very strong case for increasing
influenza vaccination coverage of primary school children. **We further
recommend a cost-benefit analysis of widening the eligibility for
influenza vaccination to secondary-school children (or certain
age-groups thereof).**

### e. What we need to do

To make decisions about opening and closing schools we need to answer
three specific questions:

1.  What is the relative prevalence of COVID-19 in children attending
    and not attending school?

2.  What is the effect on the infection rate in children of a policy
    decision to allow schools to re-open (this will inform future
    closures and openings)?

3.  At what rate does infection spread within schools (both within and
    between protective bubbles)?

Given that our understanding of the role of children in the transmission
of SARS-CoV-2 is still developing, targeted data collection programmes
are required if we are to answer these questions. The phased re-opening
schools offers an excellent opportunity to address these questions,
providing valuable information to inform future decision making.
However, low infection rates and other factors make answering these
questions challenging from a data perspective. In Techncial Document 2,
we discuss what data should be collected, and in particular, how the
COVID-19 Surveillance in KIDs (sKID) programme run by PHE could be
expanded. We recommend that sKID

-   expands so that as well as testing children attending a school, it
    also tests children from the same school who are not currently
    attending (from year groups who are invited to attend, and from year
    groups who are not)

-   tests at least 13,000 children attending school, and 13,000 children
    not attending for four consecutive weeks, in order to have
    sufficient statistical power to detect an increased prevalence
    within schools

-   include an element of responsive testing: positive diagnosis of
    school children should be followed by tests of other children/staff
    from within the same school in order to understand disease
    transmission within schools, and possibly from others living with
    these children in order to better understand the risks to cohabitors
    of living with infected children

-   continues to test children isolated from school after a positive
    test within their bubble.

Our analysis suggests that the current design of sKIDs means that the
programme is unlikely to answer crucial policy-relevant questions. We
also note that surveillance studies such as sKID require huge sample
sizes to be effective when infection rates are low, and so responsive
testing and detailed case study analysis of test results (including of
phylogenetic data) from schools which have experienced an infection, may
be a more feasible approach to understanding transmission in schools.

The statistical design needed to understand the dynamics of COVID-19
transmission in schools is explored in further detail in Technical
Document 2.

## 3. Learning loss from school closures

There are two stages to this: first, estimating the learning loss, and
second, estimating the implications of that for outcomes of interest
such as life chances, earnings, health and mortality.

### a. What we know

1.  *Estimates of expected learning loss*

Even a relatively short time in school increases a child’s cognitive
ability; even a relatively short period of missed school will therefore
have consequences for skill growth. Missing twelve weeks of school is
likely to have a very significant impact. The impact is likely to be
greater for younger children, given evidence that investments in
children’s learning tend to be complementary over time – having higher
levels of skill in the first period makes it easier to learn more in the
second period for a given level of investment (e.g. teaching
time)[^62]<sup>.</sup> This implies that time out of school is likely to
have a bigger impact on younger children’s cognitive skills.

There is an existing literature on the impact on learning of school
closures. It is important to note however, that the current lockdown
situation is unprecedented and therefore existing evidence can only be
taken as a guide to study the magnitude of the impact on attainment loss
and gap.

The key methodological challenge is that estimating a causal impact of
school time on skills requires a setting with exogenous variation in the
former. Consequently, the most robust evidence covers the effects of
school closures because of teacher strikes, weather extremes, and other
quasi-random settings. For example, Carlsson et al (2015)[^63] use
conditionally random variation in school time to prepare for a test in
Sweden, and show that 10 days of additional learning time increases test
score measures (of knowledge/crystalised intelligence) by 1% of a
standard deviation. Lavy (2015)[^64] explores the impact of
cross-national variation in hours of instruction and found an additional
hour of instructional time in a subject per week over the school year
was associated with a gain in test scores of 6% of a standard deviation.
Burgess and Sievertsen 2020[^65], drawing on the above literature,
estimate that both of these papers imply that the loss of 12 weeks of
schooling suggests a loss of 6% of a standard deviation in test scores.
Goodman (2014)[^66] show that for every 10 days of absence due to
extreme weather (here, snowfall) in the US (Massachusetts), mathematics
scores reduced by 5% of a standard deviation. Aucejo and Romano
(2016)[^67] find a decline between 5% to 10% of a standard deviation in
mathematics score for students in the US (North Carolina) in the case of
absence due to flu. Cattan et al. (2017)[^68] use sibling differences in
data from Sweden to try and isolate the effect of school absence. They
find a moderate adverse effect of absence, which fades out by
mid-adulthood.

There are catastrophes that have generated useful data and insights to
guide us. For example, the educational impact of Hurricane Katrina in
New Orleans in 2005 has also been studied. The immediate damage was
catastrophic; in addition to around 1900 lost lives, 110 out of 126
public schools were completely destroyed, and the children who survived
the storm displaced to other states for the rest of the school year. The
immediate negative effect on test scores was substantial. Sacerdote
(2012)[^69] finds “reasonably large (7%SD to 20%SD) declines in test
scores for all students who are displaced by the hurricanes”.
Interestingly, test scores of these students subsequently recovered
partly because students were relocated to much better schools
(necessarily so, because it was the poorest schools which were worst hit
by the hurricane) and partly because of wholesale reform of the New
Orleans public school system. Whilst this might give us hope that
remedial action is possible, minimising the loss in the first place is
obviously a priority.

Others are more sanguine about the impact of the loss of twelve weeks of
schooling on educational outcomes. Hattie (2020)[^70] suggests “Do not
panic if our kids miss 10 or so weeks \[of school\]” (p. 1), though he
also states that the “most likely implication of school closures relates
to equity”. He cites as support that the pupils affected by the
earthquake in Christchurch New Zealand did not suffer much reduction to
their end-of-year test scores; this is documented in Beaglehole et al
(2017)[^71], though they also note that education was disrupted rather
than closed completely.

Finally, a different literature has documented the phenomenon of “summer
learning loss”: the view that students fall back in their learning over
the long summer break in the US. The most comprehensive systematic
review of estimates of summer learning loss is Cooper et al. 1996[^72]
who draw on evidence from 39 (largely US) studies and undertake a
meta-analysis of the results from 13 of them which meet minimum
criteria. Aspects of the methodological rigor of the evidence on summer
learning loss have been called into question by the issues raised in von
Hipple and Hamrock (2019)[^73]. This scepticism[^74] about the classic
findings of summer learning loss, with inconsistencies in estimates from
different studies, partly related to faulty research design, means that
that evidence is now seen as questionable. More recently, Atteberry and
McEachin (2019) [^75] document the huge diversity in learning loss,
taking account of the measurement issues, with a relatively small group
of students accounting for a lot of the “loss”.

The second part of the story is to estimate the later impacts of the
lost skills if they are not remediated: lower skills have implications
for individual lives and for the economy as a whole. First, a huge base
of evidence shows that earnings depend on skills, and lower skills means
lower earnings. Second, those lower earnings are reflected at a national
level in lower growth. Third, there is a link to health and to
mortality, so that in a general sense the risk of death from infection
can be compared to the risk of death from poverty.

The most important implication for an individual is lower earning
potential. Higher skills command higher earnings. As Portes (2020)[^76]
succinctly puts it, if a student misses a quarter of a school year, and
each school year brings roughly a 10% return, earnings potential is
likely to be permanently lower by around 2-2.5%. That loss is likely to
be higher if the disruption happens early in an educational career. Of
course, education matters causally for other outcomes in adulthood too,
and these are likely to be compromised by the lost skills: health and
longevity, unemployment, and wellbeing among many. Jaume and Willén
(2019)[^77] exploit cross-cohort variation in the prevalence of teacher
strikes in Argentina and show that exposure to average strike incidence
in primary school reduces earnings in mid-life for women by 1.9% and for
men by 3.2%, as well as raising unemployment.

At the national level, lower aggregate skills will reduce the growth
rate. The magnitudes are not trivial: 13 cohorts of students have been
affected by the lockdown, so from the mid-2030s, all workers in their
20s will potentially have lower skills than they would otherwise have.
And for the 50 years following that, around a quarter of the entire
workforce will have lower skills, with a consequently lower growth rate.
The present value of such a fall in the growth rate is measured in
billions not millions. Turning again to Jaume and Willén (2019)[^78],
they estimate the aggregate earnings loss in Argentina from lower skills
if $2.34 billion per year.

As well as a fall in income, all the evidence to date points to a
widening of inequality. This issue is discussed in detail below and
clearly will have further stark consequences for individual livelihoods
and for social cohesion.

One of those consequences is the impact on health and life expectancy.
Low earnings from skill loss can be expressed differently as a much
greater risk of poverty. For example, the ONS states that “In the UK,
those with a low level of educational attainment are almost five times
as likely to be in poverty now as those with a high level of education”,
and “Holding all else equal, in the UK, those with low attainment are 11
times as likely to be severely deprived as those with a high level of
education”[^79]. There is a huge literature linking poverty to ill
health and early death, though isolating a causal relationship is always
tricky. For example, Bennett et al (2018)[^80] report a 7.9 year gap in
life expectancy for women and a 9.7 year gap for men between the most
and least deprived deciles of areas poverty in 2016. Linking more
directly to outcomes for children, and again representative of a large
literature, Cattan et al (2019)[^81] show in a plausibly causal approach
that access to Sure Start Sure Start reduced the risk of hospitalisation
among primary school children, and that the health benefits grew bigger
as the children got older.

In summary, the skills loss from missing school is not trivial, and is
likely to lead to lower earnings, higher risk of poverty and
unemployment with impacts on health and life expectancy.

1.  *Variation in learning loss*

The actual loss of learning in the current pandemic will vary by
context, depending on what schools and families have been able to
provide in the way of remote schooling. It is also important to note
that attainment gaps prior between different groups of students were a
major issue prior to COVID-19 and specifically the gap between students
from low and high socio-economic status families. A priority is
therefore to provide evidence on the extent to which learning loss might
be worse for some groups, particularly socio-economically disadvantaged
students (see also Sims 2020, Montacute 2020[^82]; Burgess and Vignoles,
2020[^83]).

The Education Endowment Foundation (EEF) 2020[^84] report presents a
meta-analysis of the existing literature, focusing particularly on
studies that provide estimates of changes in attainment gaps between low
and high SES students during the school year and over the summer. This
evidence therefore provides useful quantitative data on the likely
impact of school closures on the attainment gap between disadvantaged
pupils and others. The EEF meta-analysis also includes a detailed
critique of the methodological problems with some of the summer learning
loss literature (see also von Hippel and Hamrock, 2019[^85]).

A table from the EEF report mentioned above, reproduced with their kind
permission, provides 15 key estimates of the impact of school closures
on attainment gaps from 9 studies (see Appendix).

For most studies, school closures of various descriptions worsened the
rate of change in the attainment gap, ranging from increasing it by
0.113 standard deviations per month in reading scores evidenced from a
study in Germany (Meyer et. al, 2017[^86]), to 0.009 standard deviations
per month in mathematics scores evidenced from a study in Sweden
(Lindahl, 2001[^87]). Two similar US studies (Dumont 2020[^88] and Quinn
et al. 2016[^89]<sup>)</sup> actually showed a decline (albeit very
small) in the attainment gap between the rich and poor due to school
closures, for both reading and mathematics, by 0.021 and 0.001
respectively. The EEF study calculated the average rate of change in
attainment gap to be 0.022 or 2.2% of a standard deviation per month
(EEF 2020). By their calculations, school closures will widen the
attainment gap by between 11% and 75% by September 2020, with a median
projection of 36%. The study also caveats that the projections might be
an overestimate for those students who have returned to school or who
will be returning to schools earlier than September, and for those
students in schools where remote schooling has worked well.

Another group potentially at greater risk from school closures is
students from BAME backgrounds. In terms of academic achievement
measured by GCSE scores, the latest Department for Education figures
from 2018[^90] show that Chinese, mixed and Asian groups of students
continue to perform above the national average, whilst White and Black
groups remain below. These broad groupings hide variation and some
groups, such as Gypsy/Roma and traveller of Irish heritage students,
have much lower achievement than others. Further, ethnicity intersects
with low income, particularly for BAME groups. Among low income
students, many minority ethnic groups have higher levels of academic
achievement (as measured by GCSE scores) and make more academic progress
during secondary school than White British students. However, Black
Caribbean boys perform at a similar level to White British
students[^91]<sup>.</sup> Among high income students by contrast, White
British students outperform all minority ethnic groups bar Indian
students. In terms of academic achievement therefore, it is not the case
that all BAME groups are at risk of low achievement pre COVID-19.
Whether this continues during the pandemic depends on the quality of
remote schooling and support from parents, and whether that varies
across ethnic groups.

Of particular cause for concern is the fact that while students from
BAME backgrounds make up twenty-nine percent of the students in England
and Wales, they account for a disproportionate amount of the school
exclusions. Mixed White and Black Caribbean pupils had particularly high
exclusion rates and were both nearly three times as likely to be
permanently excluded as White British pupils[^92]. Out of all ethnic
groups, pupils from Black and Mixed backgrounds had the highest rate of
temporary exclusions. In 2014/2015, 250 Black Caribbean pupils out of
5,770 pupils were permanently excluded from school[^93]<sup>.</sup>
There is also a large literature on the racism experienced by Black
Caribbean students in particular, putting them at risk of exclusion and
disengagement[^94]. Reports of punishments being related to race are
widespread. The Independent recently reported, “schools are unfairly
punishing Black students for their hairstyles, wearing bandanas and
kissing teeth” due to racial bias and general lack of
understanding[^95]. Previous studies have also shown that school
absences and suspensions have been linked to lower test scores and lower
school performance. If school closures lead to some students who are
already at risk of exclusion and/or high absence rates falling still
further behind, they may become even less engaged on their return to
face to face schooling. We might then expect an exacerbation of these
issues in academic year 2020/21.

Some BAME groups are also at much greater risk of having low income
which will impact on families’ ability to support children during the
pandemic. Even amongst highly educated individuals there are significant
differences in earnings by ethnicity. Among graduates for example, while
Indian and Other Asian ethnic groups had the highest average (£28,500)
earnings five years after graduating, Black and Pakistani ethnic groups
had the lowest average earnings five years after graduating
(£22,400)[^96]<sup>.</sup> At the other extreme, according to the Office
of National Statistics, children in Bangladeshi and Pakistani households
were most likely to live in low income and materially deprived areas out
of all ethnic groups[^97]<sup>.</sup> Children living in poverty are
more likely to have lower levels of educational outcomes and, as
discussed in the next section, more likely to experience learning loss
during the pandemic.

1.  *Variation in schooling and home support during the pandemic*

It is important to understand why school closures are likely to have
impacted on children’s learning and specifically why they might have
widened the socio-economic gap in achievement. There are two main
mechanisms. First, household income and family environment are major
determinants of children’s academic achievement in normal circumstances.
The pandemic is likely to have exacerbated the effects of these
determinants of learning, not least because there is some evidence that
socio-economically advantaged parents tend to compensate for any
deterioration in schooling to a greater extent. Second, remote schooling
might be less effective than face to face schooling, particularly given
that schools had to switch to remote schooling very rapidly in March
without any preparation.

We do have some current data from the UK to illuminate us on the first
issue. A recent brief from The Sutton Trust[^98] reports findings from a
Public First survey conducted between 1-3 April 2020, on a sample of
1508 parents with children aged 2 to 18, weighted on the basis of
gender, SES and region to represent the entire population. The report
suggests that during this crisis 44% of middle class parents are
spending more than 4 hours a day on home schooling. One third of working
class parents are doing so. Note also that this survey was conducted
early on in lockdown and we might expect that many parents will have
been able to spend less time supporting their children as lockdown
persisted and expectations from employers increased. Moreover, middle
and higher income households are, unsurprisingly, more likely to spend
money (\>£100) on their child’s learning during the lockdown (19%)
compared to working class households (8%). Data from this Sutton Trust
survey also suggested that pupils in independent schools were more than
twice as likely to be experiencing online teaching during lockdown. For
example, only about one in five children in state schools were taking
part in live and recorded lessons on a daily basis. In independent
schools, just over half of students were accessing online lessons daily.
This is perhaps partly attributable to the fact that whilst 60% of state
schools already had an online platform of some description prior to
lockdown whereas only 37% of state schools had one.

Andrew et al 2020[^99] report similar findings from an online survey of
4000 parents with children aged 4 to 15, conducted by Institute for
Fiscal Studies and Institute of Education between 29 April-12 May 2020.
The sample is weighted to provide an England wide picture. Children in
the richest quintile of families spend over 75 minutes per day more on
school work than children in the poorest quintile of households. This
quickly accumulates: over the (at least) 34 days that schools will be
closed, this difference adds up to more than seven full school days. For
some year groups, particularly those nearing the end of schooling, this
might have a major impact on their attainment. The report also finds
that students from more affluent families are more likely to have access
to private tutoring, individual discussions with teachers, access to
technology and online resources. All three of these resources are likely
to ensure that high SES students are better able to gain from remote
learning.

The evidence on the impact of remote learning techniques as a substitute
for face to face teaching is rather limited, particularly in the context
of primary and secondary school pupils. Prior to the pandemic, online
learning was only prevalent in higher education and has been
characterised by high levels of drop out from courses. Moreover, during
the pandemic, the provision of remote teaching has been highly varied
across schools, both in terms of quantity and quality.

The most comprehensive data on what schools are currently offering to
support remote learning comes from a recent National Foundation for
Educational Research (NFER) report[^100], which presents headline
findings from an England wide survey of 1,233 senior leaders and 1,821
teachers from primary and secondary schools (weighted to represent the
population). The survey focuses on school provision, pupil engagement in
remote learning and the factors that affect it. This survey represents
nine per cent of primary schools and 20 percent of secondary schools in
England and further longitudinal follow ups are
planned[^101]<sup>.</sup>

NFER have kindly shared early findings with us and full details can be
found in Julius and Sims (2020), Lucas et al. 2020 and Sharp et al.
2020[^102]<sup>.</sup> Findings include:

-   In May 2020, teachers reported being in regular contact with, on
    average, 60 percent of their pupils. However, less than half of
    pupils (42 per cent) returned their last piece of set work.

-   Most teachers (80 per cent) reported that they were covering less of
    the curriculum with their classes than usual.

-   Most teachers (90 per cent) believed that their pupils were doing
    less or much less work than they would usually expect at this time
    of year.

-   Teachers reported that the following proportions of pupils are less
    engaged than their classmates: pupils with limited access to IT
    and/or study space (81 per cent); vulnerable pupils (62 per cent);
    pupils with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) (58
    per cent); pupils eligible for Pupil Premium funding (52 per cent);
    and young carers (48 per cent).

-   Pupil engagement and *disadvantaged* pupil engagement were both
    lower in the most deprived schools. Teachers in the most deprived
    schools were in contact with fewer pupils.

-   Teachers reported that, on average, just over half (55 per cent) of
    their pupils’ parents were engaged with their children’s home
    learning. Parental engagement was significantly lower in the most
    deprived schools (41 per cent) compared to the least deprived
    schools (62 per cent).

-   The proportion of pupils with little to no IT access in the most
    deprived schools (39 per cent) was double that of the least deprived
    schools (19 per cent). Teachers in the most deprived schools were
    also more likely than those in the least deprived schools to say
    that all areas of the curriculum are currently getting less
    attention than usual.

-   Schools using a virtual learning environment (VLE) to inform pupils
    about learning activities – rather than the school website, and
    those delivering learning content to pupils through online
    conversations or activities that involve consolidating previous
    learning or revising, had higher pupil engagement levels and an
    increased probability of having highly engaged *disadvantaged*
    pupils.

-   Three-quarters of senior leaders reported that their schools were
    offering ‘social or welfare’ support to vulnerable pupils, often by
    working with other agencies. For example, many schools were
    supporting their pupils by providing food vouchers and parcels (95
    per cent) and providing non-education related information (83 per
    cent) to assist families.

-   There were greater concerns about the welfare of vulnerable pupils
    in the most deprived schools: 54 per cent of senior leaders in these
    schools reported significant concerns for the safety and wellbeing
    of vulnerable pupils, relative to 35 per cent of senior leaders in
    the least deprived schools.

-   Leaders from schools with the highest proportion of FSM pupils were
    more likely to report that they had experienced a significant drop
    in numbers of pupils attending school before 20 March (73 per cent)
    than those with the lowest proportion of FSM pupils (56 per cent).
    This suggests that disadvantaged pupils may have been missing school
    before the lockdown.

-   In May, senior leaders reported that they had only 75 per cent of
    their normal FTE teaching capacity available: 53 per cent to work in
    schools and 22 per cent to work at home only.

Overall, this research suggests that students from the most deprived
schools are less likely to be engaged in remote learning compared to
those from more affluent schools, that teachers are very concerned about
lack of engagement in remote learning for about a quarter of their
students and that little or no access to IT is an issue.

The EEF have also published a rapid evidence review of 60 review studies
to investigate the effectiveness of various remote learning methods
including distance learning, blended learning, computer assisted
learning and educational games. Their review covers all age groups of
students[^103]. The report summarises key findings and also appraises
the methodological rigour of the evidence base. While acknowledging the
limited number of studies which are directly applicable to school age
pupils, the results suggest nil or only limited impact on outcomes from
remote teaching compared to traditional teaching. For example, Means et.
al, 2013[^104] found no significant difference in student outcomes when
comparing purely online vs traditional face to face teaching. However,
studies that compared blended teaching (online combined with face to
face) with just face to face teaching, on average found a positive
impact on learning outcomes from the former.

One of the most common forms of learning during the current pandemic has
been the use of “apps” - mobile based applications which also give
adaptive feedback to students. The EEF review of 29 studies focusing on
the effectiveness of computer assisted learning found that most of the
review studies showed an overall positive impact from this technology,
ranging from a 75% improvement in vocabulary test scores, evidenced by
Chiu 2013, to a 9% improvement in mathematics learning outcomes,
evidenced by Steenbergen-Hu and Cooper 2013. Only one study showed a
negative impact, specifically a 26% reduction in reading scores as
evidenced by Strong et al., 2011.

Overall there is insufficient evidence to date to guide us on the
expected impact of remote schooling on learning. However, most studies
do not suggest that online teaching is, in and of itself, likely to have
a major negative impact on learning. However, this finding may not hold
if the online teaching is of poor quality, which may be the case given
the speed at which schools were expected to adapt to it. Nor will it
hold if students are unable or unwilling to actively engage with it, as
seems to be the case for many. Further, the EEF review did not uncover
any studies that measured the effectiveness of computer assisted/online
learning on disadvantaged students’ learning in particular. Since access
to technology is a major challenge for such students, we need more
evidence on this issue.

Certainly at a practical level, there have been growing concerns about
uneven access and availability of inputs into education (for example,
computers, laptops, online resources, private tutoring) and its impact
on learning outcomes. Access and provision to these vital resources
varies across socio-economic groups and across schools. Andrew et al,
2020[^105] find rich parents were 15% more likely to report that their
child’s school offers real time online classes than their poorer
counterparts. They also find children from poor families were only half
as likely to have access to private tutoring compared to their richer
peers.

It is also worth noting that even when schools open, there may be
ongoing issues regarding differences in schooling experienced by
children from different socio-economic backgrounds. In the period
leading up to lockdown, schools reported that not all their students
were attending. Further, it appears that students from more
socio-economically disadvantaged backgrounds were less likely to attend
school in the period just before lockdown. For example, the National
Foundation for Education Research survey[^106] reported that 61% of
school leaders reported a significant fall in the number of pupils
attending school prior to 20th March (the date schools closed). School
leaders in schools with the highest proportion of Free School Meal
pupils reported a far larger fall in the numbers of pupils attending
school (73% decline) compared to those in schools with the lowest
proportion of FSM pupils (57% decline). The Institute for Fiscal Studies
survey of parents in May 2020[^107] found that only 39% of primary
school parents and 45% of secondary school parents were planning to send
their children to school when they reopened. Further, higher income
parents were more likely to say that they would send their children to
school than lower income parents. As of week commencing 11th June 2020
in schools that were open, only 32% of reception children were actually
attending, 29% of year 1 students were attending and 39% of year 6
students were attending[^108]<sup>.</sup> Persuading parents to send
their children to school, particularly those from low socio-economic
status backgrounds, may be a challenge though the Government has
announced that in September usual sanctions can be applied to parents
who do not send their children to school.

### b. What we need to do

We do not currently have direct measures of children’s learning loss as
a result of the school closures. This is clearly a major data gap. The
first step is therefore to collect the necessary test score information
needed to estimate the scale of the learning loss from school lockdown.
While we have good data current on “inputs”[^109] into home learning
(for example, parental time and ability, school provision, and
availability of IT kit), there is currently nothing available on
“outputs”.

Outputs of the skills formation process are typically measured by
achievement tests. These might be one-off high-stakes tests such as
GCSEs, non-qualification but internally-important school tests, or
recurring low-stakes tests on online learning platforms. In the present
pandemic context, such measures are rare: all qualification tests have
been cancelled, and most schools understandably appear to have cancelled
internal tests. And yet, such data are key to quantifying the risk from
keeping schools closed.

An ideal design to properly gauge the learning loss from lockdown would
take a difference-in-difference design: use a robust measure of pupil
achievement both pre- and post-lockdown, and for pupils who were and
others who were not kept out of school. However, since all schools
closed[^110], this approach is simply not possible. Second best would be
to look just at the longitudinal aspect and compare the distribution of
equivalent test scores before and after school lockdown. Understandably,
it appears that very few schools are testing pupils as this report is
written (late June 2020), so the first date of general testing will be
the general return to school in September. Because there is no national,
officially-sanctioned test for all age groups[^111] at that date in the
UK, we recommend an additional test at the beginning of the school year,
and then again at the end of the school year to measure any catch-up
during the year. The burden on schools now and more so in September will
be large, so we also recommend that these tests be carried out on a
sample of schools rather than be universal.

The second problem we face is that while the exercise could be carried
out using bespoke tests, for many schools there would be no comparator
for the previous cohort, the “before” benchmark. In this case, we
recommend using tests that have a ‘synthetic’ before score – that is,
normed tests that have a known and validated typical score in normal
times[^112]<sup>.</sup> These norms can act as baseline, ideally
differentiated by some basic demographic controls. The limitation of
this approach is that these age-normed tests are not closely aligned
with the curriculum and may instead tend to measure students’ general
ability and hence understate the extent of specific learning loss
related to the curriculum. The age-appropriate tests would be taken by
pupils of all age groups in school in September 2020 in samples of
schools; ideally, we would pick different schools per age group to
sample a wider range of school effects. Prior to detailed power
calculations, a rough order of magnitude based on typical ICC estimates
would be around 150 secondary schools per age group, and perhaps 600
primary schools per age group. It may well be that the UK Department for
Education will want to carry out such tests to gauge the depth of
learning loss, and it would obviously be productive to confer.

Another, more informal and *ad hoc* approach, is to collect data from
schools that are using their own internal tests to assess the progress
of their students, for example using online learning platforms. One
powerful example of this is Goldstein[^113] reporting work carried out
by Chetty and team at Track the Recovery[^114].

We have been able to access some similar data for the UK; as far as we
know, this is the first time that outcome data for the period of the
Covid-19 closure has been analysed to show the impact of the lockdown in
the UK. This data is from an online learning platform, where young
people between the ages of 5 and 16 from subscribing schools can take
Star tests on reading and understanding. We are grateful to Renaissance
Learning for providing anonymised pupil and school test data for this
report, including a pupil ID reference that is used for internal
Renaissance purposes only, a date of test, minutes spent per test, and
the test scores. In all, around 160,000 data points were provided for
the period September 2019 through mid-June 2020. There is no generally
set time frame for taking the tests so a week-by-week or month-by-month
analysis might be misleading: for example, it might be that the more
able students tend to take tests later in the year. But clearly, one
very salient factor for test taking will be the school lockdown and the
strong encouragement from schools to use online resources. So, we simply
look at the distribution of test scores before and after the lockdown,
for a fixed set of pupils who take tests 1 or 2 times pre lockdown, and
also take tests 1 or 2 times post lockdown. This is designed to reduce
the scope for selection issues to drive the results. Figure 2 plots the
interquartile range for this group shows that the difference between the
scores of high-performers and low-performers increases markedly after
the schools lockdown. This is particularly clear for primary school
children, less so for secondary school children. To scale the IQR, the
pre-lockdown average scores were respectively 378 (for year 3), 541
(year 5), 734 (year 7) and 870 (year 9). Figure 3 provides more detail
in the form of a QQ plot.


<img src="/diagrams/schools/image2.png" style="width:100%" />

**Figure 2**


<img src="/diagrams/schools/image3.png" style="width:100%" />

**Figure 3: QQ Plot**

This picture fits well with the increased inequality seen in learning inputs over the lockdown period, and is concerning for the future learning outcomes for these cohorts and their life chances beyond education.

## Measures of other losses

In this section we consider some of the other impacts from school
closures, beyond infection and learning.

Our response to COVID-19 has had an acute economic and social impact.
For example, the impact on unemployment and household income has been
immediate[^115], though clearly muted due to the furlough scheme in the
UK. To give some sense of scale, data from the Office for National
Statistics suggests a 69% increase in the numbers claiming unemployment
benefit between mid-March and mid-May[^116]. In the medium term we are
anticipating further significant loss of economic activity and
accompanying job losses. These worsening economic conditions will have
major impacts on households and hence on children and young people, not
least by increasing poverty rates.

The long run relationship between poverty in childhood and adult
physical and mental health is well documented. Indeed, the UK had
already seen an increase in health and mortality inequalities prior to
COVID-19 following the 2008 Great
Recession[^117]<sup>,</sup>[^118]<sup>.</sup> COVID-19 is likely to
exacerbate such inequalities. Any further reductions in household income
will also tend to have a causal negative impact on children’s
achievement and wellbeing. As an illustration, a recent estimate
suggests that an £860 increase in household income results in gains in
cognitive test scores of around 5-27% of a standard deviation[^119].
Further, unemployment and reductions in household income are highly
stressful for parents (e.g. recessions are linked to increases in
suicide rates[^120]<sup>,</sup>[^121]). Parental stress also impacts
directly on child wellbeing. For example, the 2008 Great Recession, and
the economic uncertainty it caused, was associated with an increased
risk of child abuse and harsher parenting by mothers[^122]<sup>.</sup>
For those families experiencing economic hardship themselves due to job
losses etc., there was also an increase in child neglect. Of course, the
impact of the current economic conditions will also depend on the
Government’s policy response to it. Any reductions in the level of
public services available as a result of the more difficult
macroeconomic situation will impact further on children and young
people, not least via reductions in the quality of health and education
provision.

However, these general effects from COVID-19, whilst very relevant to
children, are not necessarily directly related to school closures. In
this section we review evidence that might inform our understanding of
any direct impacts from not having face to face schooling.

1.  <span id="_Toc46340148" class="anchor"></span>*What we know*

Remote schooling is likely to impact children and young people
differently, depending on their age and stage of development. Early in
the outbreak, psychologists and medical practitioners recognised the
substantial risks from school closures and social isolation in terms of
their potential negative impact on children’s physical and mental
health[^123]<sup>,</sup>[^124]<sup>,</sup>[^125]<sup>,</sup>[^126]<sup>,</sup>[^127]<sup>,</sup>[^128]<sup>.</sup>

In terms of physical health, levels of physical activity are likely to
be lower as a result of remote schooling even without additional
physical distancing rules, since children tend to be less active out of
term time. Sleep patterns and diets have also found to be worse when
children are out of school. Growing levels of obesity among children are
a risk, since children tend to gain weight when out of
school[^129][^130].

Previous health crises have also suggested that procedures such as
quarantines have a negative impact on children’s psychological health
and risk of post-traumatic stress disorder[^131]. A systematic review by
Loades et al. is also relevant to this issue. It reviewed 63 studies
that reported on the impact of social isolation and loneliness on
children and young people’s mental health. Most studies were
observational and there was risk of bias[^132]. However, the conclusion
was that social isolation increased the risk of both depression and
anxiety both during and after the period of isolation.

In normal times, children benefit from strong attachments to other
adults, often teachers, from feeling that they belong at school, and
from their relationships with peers[^133]<sup>,</sup>[^134]. Social
competence, autonomy and relatedness are all important to children’s
wellbeing and schools play a key role in fostering
these[^135]<sup>.</sup> By implication, this suggests that not being in
school will reduce wellbeing for many children.

Social interactions and relationships are particularly important for
adolescents. Adolescents who feel lonely and less connected to other
people have poorer physical and mental health[^136]. For example,
socially isolated teens were found to have poorer cardiovascular health
in young adulthood[^137]. Orben, Tamova and Blakemore have argued in
*The Lancet* that social distancing and being socially isolated as a
result of undertaking remote schooling, is a particular risk for
adolescents[^138]. Specifically, it is a period during which young
people have a greater sensitivity to, and need for, social connection
and interactions with peers[^139]<sup>.</sup> The school environment is
obviously vital in providing this. Adolescence is also a period of onset
for many mental health conditions. Combining unprecedented social
isolation with a critically important development period puts these
young people at increased risk of mental health problems.

There have also been reports in the media regarding an increase in
suicide rates among children and young people. Suicide and self-harm
among children and young people has increased since 2010[^140][^141] and
social isolation has been identified as a potential risk[^142]. However,
official statistics on suicide lag and cannot yet be used to determine
whether or not there has been an increase in child and young people
suicides during the pandemic. Real-time surveillance of child suicide is
one way of tracking the problem but obviously comes with caveats as it
is not based on official statistics. The National Child Mortality
Database has constructed a real time measure of likely suicides in
children and young people under the age of 18 over the period January to
May 2020[^143]. This covers the first 8 weeks of lockdown from
23<sup>rd</sup> March to 17<sup>th</sup> May. They could not find any
statistically significant trend given the small numbers involved, though
they noted that the number of cases had increased on the previous year.

It is important to also note the risk that on re-opening, schools and
education policy might overly focus on the learning loss from school
closures at the expense of considering psychological impacts. Since
mental health and academic achievement are also closely related, one
needs to consider and address both these issues
simultaneously[^144]<sup>,</sup>[^145]. Even before COVID-19, the UK had
a growing problem with mental health among children and young people.
Around 1 in 8 school-age children had clinically impairing mental health
conditions and up to a quarter of older teen girls (16-19 year olds)
reported such conditions[^146]<sup>.</sup> There is also agreement that
children or young people with pre-existing mental health problems are
going to be, on average, at higher risk during the pandemic. Hence a
holistic view of the potential costs of remote schooling is important.
Overall, the combination of social distancing, physical restrictions on
movement, and school closures leading to a lack of routine and limited
contact with other adults and peers, are all likely to negatively impact
on children and teens.

Evidence on the prevalence of these problems during the pandemic is
still limited but there is some useful data on child and youth mental
health and on the impact of lockdown and school closures on parents’
time use and their paid work, which we review below.

1.  *Impact on child health*

Early evidence from during the pandemic suggests that children do report
that they miss being in school. It is young people (adolescents) who are
least keen on remote schooling, with some signs that younger children
also enjoy being in their home environment[^147]. More generally, there
is a growing body of evidence suggesting that children and young people
have suffered worsening mental health during the
pandemic[^148]<sup>,</sup>[^149]<sup>,</sup>[^150]<sup>,</sup>[^151]<sup>,</sup>[^152]<sup>.</sup>
The Children’s Commissioner instigated a survey of children and youth in
March 2020 (n=2000) and also found a decline in young people’s reported
life satisfaction and wellbeing, with both children and young people
reporting negative impacts from social isolation[^153]. Emerging Minds
surveyed parents, carers and adolescents about their mental health and
behaviours[^154]. The sample is a convenience one and is not nationally
representative. The evidence emerging from this survey is mixed. Parents
reported an increase in behaviour and attention problems among primary
school age children, and an increase in attention problems among
secondary school children. Yet parents also reported a reduction in
their children’s emotional problems. Adolescents did not report
significant changes in their behaviour or emotions. Such data are
potentially problematic to interpret however, not least because they are
not nationally representative. Further, it is difficult to identify the
impact of school closures specifically, since it is impossible to
separate out the impact of remote learning on children and young people
from the impact of the greater levels of social distancing required more
generally (though they are clearly related).

It is also obviously the case that some children are more vulnerable and
at risk of both mental health problems and physical abuse than others,
for example children in care[^155]. There has been a documented rise in
domestic accidents among children and concerns that child protection
procedures are not working as effectively, with children not being
properly assessed in terms of their risk[^156]<sup>,</sup>[^157]. A
recent survey of vulnerable young people themselves[^158] indicates that
these young people who were already at risk think that their mental
health has deteriorated. They have growing fears and concerns about a
range of issues, including health, the impact of school and university
closures, lack of social contact and in general the loss of routine.
Among those with greater vulnerabilities, a NSPCC survey[^159] of those
in counselling suggests that poor relationships are a major issue for
some young people, as well as very difficult family circumstances,
potential abuse and difficulties engaging with school work. Further,
children with specific conditions, such as neurodevelopmental
difficulties like Autism, are also reporting greater levels of
anxiety[^160]<sup>,</sup>[^161]<sup>.</sup>

Given the additional risks arising from our response to COVID-19, lack
of access to public services, particularly in the area of mental health,
is a major concern[^162]. The Coronavirus Bill reduced the statutory
requirement for some services[^163] and many services have also moved
online, which is unlikely to be optimal. Evidence on the scale and
impact of reductions in services is limited however. The YoungMinds
survey mentioned above found that around one quarter of young people
with a pre-existing condition reported that they were unable to access
mental health services, though the survey is not nationally
representative[^164].

Another issue affecting children’s health that has arisen during the
pandemic is food insecurity[^165], which is a problem that predates
COVID-19. For low income families experiencing food insecurity, schools
provide a vital component of their children’s daily food via Free School
Meals. Although Free School Meals are now being provided to children
remotely, there was a period early in lockdown when they were not.
Children potentially experienced food scarcity during this period.
Robust medical data on malnutrition experienced by children during the
pandemic is lacking. However, The Food Foundation undertook a survey
early in the lockdown. This was the period during which Free School
Meals were unavailable and there were significant shortages of some food
in shops[^166]. They estimated that the proportion of families with
children experiencing food insecurity during the lockdown increased from
5.7% to 11.0%. Further, just under a third of adults with children
eligible for Free School Meals reported food insecurity over the period,
compared to just one in ten adults with children who are not eligible
for FSM.

1.  *Ability of parents to return to work*

Schools being closed has also had implications for parents[^167].
Although the primary purpose of school is not to provide childcare, it
has become apparent during the pandemic that parents do rely on schools
for this purpose. If most children are not in school, their parents must
undertake childcare and ideally support their home schooling. This is
only feasible for those who work at home. For other parents, school
closures will significantly impact on their ability to undertake paid
work.

**<span class="underline">  
</span>**


<img src="/diagrams/schools/chart1.png" style="width:100%" />

**Figure 4**

Source: This chart is derived from data kindly provided by Monica Costas
Dias using Labour Force Survey 2019. A full discussion of the
constraints regarding working from home is further discussed by the
IFS[^168]<sup>.</sup>

Figure 4 shows the proportions of people in different professions who
are “constrained” in terms of being able to do their jobs, which is
defined as having dependent children and not being able to work from
home. Hence one in five of all workers in elementary occupations have
dependent children and are unable to do their job from home. This
constraint implies they may not be able to go back to work if schools
(or some form of childcare) do not open or if there are repeated
closures. As can be seen, there is a clear divide between more
high-skilled, well paid professions, where a far lower proportion is
constrained due to being better able to work at home.

We can therefore infer that the low-skilled will be most constrained if
schools fail to open or are subsequently closed. Without government
intervention, this group will suffer disproportionate income losses as a
result of closures. Further, those with higher salaries may be better
able to fund alternative childcare, exacerbating this difference.

The twin effects of the pandemic on work and schooling have also
affected women particularly badly, and potentially reversed progress
towards greater gender equality[^169]<sup>,</sup>[^170]. Women are much
more likely to work in the service sector which has been largely shut
down (Figure 5), reducing their employment and earnings. Since work
experience is very valuable in the labour market, an extended period of
time with no work may damage their future job and earnings
prospects[^171][^172]. Women are also less likely to have jobs that can
be done at home and this means that they are less likely to be able to
continue to work during lockdown. The evidence is also clear that the
closure of schools and nurseries has meant far greater caring burdens at
home. Historically such caring responsibilities have tended to fall
disproportionately on women, with implications for the disruption to
their paid work[^173]. Evidence from data collected during the pandemic
confirms that women have been doing a disproportionate amount of the
child care. Among couples where both parents are working, half of the
hours that mothers work at home are combined with childcare, compared
with just 30% of fathers’ hours[^174]. Single mothers have felt these
pressures even more strongly, unable to share childcare and home
schooling, and typically being in lower paid jobs to start with. It is
perhaps noteworthy that Understanding Society data also suggests women
have been experiencing higher levels of psychological distress, which
appears to be attributable to additional hours of childcare and home
schooling[^175].


<img src="/diagrams/schools/image4.jpg" style="width:100%" alt="https://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/figure%201.jpg" />

**Figure 5**

Source: This graph is reproduced from analysis by The Institute for
Fiscal Studies on issues relating to home working and the labour
market[^176]. For a fuller description of the issues see <https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/14791>

Different ethnic groups may also be differently affected by lockdown and
remote schooling. Pakistani and Bangladeshi families (and to a lesser
extent Indian and Black African families) are more likely to have an
economically inactive woman in a household, meaning they may be better
able to provide childcare and support home schooling with little impact
on other adults in the household who are doing paid work and hence
minimal impact on household income[^177][^178]. However, most minority
ethnic groups are also more likely to work in shut down sectors, and
some groups have a higher probability of being self-employed[^179]. The
self-employed have seen large falls in income during the pandemic and
are also more likely to be lower income in the first place. Hence the
negative impact of the pandemic for many minority ethnic groups is more
likely to be via a reduction in their household income rather than the
direct impact of school closures on parents’ ability to work.

1.  <span id="_Toc45279433" class="anchor"></span>*What we need to do*

Evidence documenting the impact of school closures and social distancing
on children’s mental health and other outcomes is accumulating, though
much of it at this stage is self-report survey data. Again, it is
important to note the urgency of good data and research on these issues
since this level of isolation is unprecedented[^180]. Care is needed
since many of the early surveys of children’s experiences during the
pandemic were not random samples and hence not representative of the
population. A priority is longitudinal high-quality mental and physical
health data on children and adolescents over the short and medium term
to adequately monitor the impact of this pandemic[^181].

That said, a number of high-quality open access data sources are indeed
coming on line, including follow up surveys of a number of ESRC funded
large scale national longitudinal studies. The list below is not
comprehensive but gives some sense of the scale of data that will be
available within the next few months:

1.  Understanding Society[^182]. This is the large-scale UK Household
    Longitudinal Study, based at the Institute for Social and Economic
    Research (ISER) at the University of Essex. Understanding Society
    (US) went into the field in April 2020. 17,450 participants
    completed the survey in the first Wave. The 20-minute survey asked
    parents a range of questions about the impact of COVID-19. It had a
    particular focus on the impact of home schooling. It collected data
    on adult mental health but not child mental health (minimum age of
    respondent was age 16).

2.  The Centre for Longitudinal Studies (CLS) launched a COVID related
    survey across 5 of its cohorts in May 2020, asking similar questions
    of 50,000 respondents. Questions covered physical and mental health,
    schooling and social contact. A number of the studies include
    respondents with children. The relevant studies for data on impacts
    on children are:

    1.  Millennium Cohort Study (born 2000-02)

    2.  Next Steps (born 1989-90)

    3.  1970 British Cohort Study.

3.  The Avon Study of Parents and Children have collected data from
    their cohorts which consist of a parent cohort (n=3720 mean age 59)
    and a “child” or second-generation cohort (n=2850 mean age 28).
    Since these are longitudinal surveys, comparison with pre COVID
    measures are possible. Survey questions included standard measures
    of depression and anxiety. Obviously this study cannot inform us
    about mental health in children given the age of the cohorts but it
    is worth noting that they found increases in anxiety and reductions
    in wellbeing particularly in younger populations, women, low income
    households and those with pre-existing health conditions[^183].

4.  The National Study of Health and Wellbeing: Children and Young
    people is planning a 2020 follow up of the parents, children and
    adolescents who took part in the previous 2017 survey. The latter
    was a representative sample for England. The focus of the follow up
    survey will be on documenting mental health, physical health,
    development and emotional disorders, and comparing pre COVID
    measures with data collected during the pandemic.

5.  The UK Household Longitudinal Study administered a web based survey
    which was completed by 17,452 panel members in April 2020. This
    survey assessed panel members’ mental health using the 12-item
    General Health Questionnaire. Initial analysis suggests that young
    people, women and those living with young children saw the greatest
    deterioration in mental health[^184].

6.  ESRC has funded a University of Cardiff project led by Stephanie van
    Goozen to measure the impact of the pandemic on 300 primary school
    children who prior to COVID-19 were deemed by schools to be “at
    risk”, i.e. who already had emotional, cognitive, developmental or
    social vulnerabilities. They will focus on the impact of the
    pandemic period on these children’s mental health.

7.  The MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit at the University of
    Cambridge has gone into the field to collect data on 200 primary
    school children for which they have pre COVID-19 baseline data. The
    study, Resilience in Education and Development (RED) will provide
    rich data on children’s mental health. The longitudinal follow up
    took place in June 2020 and the study is led by Duncan Astle.

It is too early for results from these studies but they are likely to
yield higher quality data than some early “snapshot” data, given their
longitudinal dimension and that they are more representative of the
relevant population. These studies should provide a rich picture of
children and young people’s mental and physical health during the
pandemic, and some aspects of their home schooling. They will not be
able to show the impact of school closures on children’s health per se
since they do not have a causal design and during the period of data
collection most schools remained physically closed for most children. We
would also suggest that when designing a study to capture the learning
loss associated with school closures (see section 4), schools should
also be asked to measure student wellbeing.

## 5. Commentary on the Government’s school opening plan & next steps

We note the recent (2/7/20) Department for Education (DfE) guidance
regarding school opening in September 2020[^185]. Its recognition of the
significant costs of school closures, as well as the need to minimise
the risks from opening schools, is to be welcomed. Our report supports
the DfE position that all children need to return to face to face
schooling wherever possible and that keeping schools open should be
prioritised. School attendance must indeed be compulsory for the
majority of children (i.e. those who are not at particular risk from
COVID-19) and decisions to open and shut schools must be made on
objective criteria with closures minimised. As we state above, what is
urgently needed are clear and well communicated criteria to guide school
closures and re-openings. This will also help to address teacher, parent
and carer concerns about pupils returning to school.

The DfE guidance provides a lot of specific information for schools on
how they should open and operate, as well as what will be required in
preparation for a potential return to remote teaching during any future
school closures. No doubt this guidance will change as the situation
changes and more evidence emerges as to the effectiveness of different
strategies to minimise infection transmission. Clear, realistic and
timely communication with school leaders and teachers is vital. It is a
major challenge to change ways of working in schools, particularly in a
fast-moving environment with rapidly changing guidance. This needs to be
recognised and guidance kept as simple and stable as possible. Further,
some of the changes that are required of schools will need additional
resource (whether that be in terms of additional staffing or pieces of
PPE and other kit). This too needs to be recognised and an adequate
level of resource provided. The challenge of simultaneously adapting
schools to the safety mitigation procedures required, alongside also
ensuring that adequate provision will be available in the event of
subsequent school closures, should not be underestimated.

The DfE guidance also proposes additional resource to support academic
catch up for pupils who have fallen behind. This will be vitally
important if we are to mitigate some of the increasing inequality in
academic achievement that we are likely to see as a result of the
pandemic. The DfE guidance that schools need to support children’s
wellbeing when they return is also supported by our report. However,
again additional resources will be required. We also recommend **that
the Government develops policies and provides additional resource to
support those students who have experienced learning and other losses
from school closures to ensure they are not disadvantaged over their
lifetime. We need to mitigate the economic scarring that will result
from educational deficits in particular. The Government also needs to
consider long term options to support re-entry to educational
opportunity later in life for those disadvantaged by COVID-19 now**.

As discussed at length in previous sections, there is much we still do
not know. Further surveillance and studies are needed to:

1. Determine the extent to which children of different ages transmit
COVID-19, including undertaking school case studies to better
understand transmission processes;

2. Understand the effectiveness of different interventions and
strategies designed to reduce infection transmission in schools,
including learning from strategies being adopted in other countries;

3. Measure the learning and other losses from school closures during
the pandemic; identify successful school interventions to reverse the
detrimental impact of school closures on learning loss and other
outcomes;

4. To address (2) and (3) we need to encourage experimentation,
better evaluation and good knowledge exchange mechanisms to share
learning across the education system.

## Technical Appendices

The following are materials prepared by individual members of DELVE as
inputs into this report.

{% assign addenda = site.addenda | sort: 'ref'  %}
<ul>
{% for addendum in addenda  %}
{% if addendum.report == 'SCH' %}
<li> {% include link-addendum-title.html %}
  {% if addendum.authors %}
{% assign authors=addendum.authors %}
    <p><i>Prepared for the DELVE Initiative by {% include listauthors.html %}</i></p></li>
{% endif %}
{% endif %}
{% endfor %}
</ul>

## Appendix: Estimates of the socio-economic gaps in learning

Standardised estimates for gap change during school closures, sourced
from Education Endowment Foundation study.

<table>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>Study_year</strong></td>
<td><strong>Country</strong></td>
<td><strong>n_student</strong></td>
<td><strong>Subject</strong></td>
<td><strong>Disadvantage Definition</strong></td>
<td><span class="math inline"><em>Δ̂</em><sub><em>i</em></sub></span> <strong><br />
(delta_gap)</strong></td>
<td><p><strong>SE</strong><span class="math inline">${\widehat{(\Delta}}_{i})$</span></p>
<p><strong>(standard error)</strong></p></td>
<td><p><br /><span class="math display"><em>Δ</em><sub><em>i</em></sub><sup>*</sup></span><br /></p>
<p><strong>(shrunken estimates)</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>burkam_2004</td>
<td>USA</td>
<td>3664</td>
<td>Other</td>
<td>SES1</td>
<td>0.049</td>
<td>0.011</td>
<td>0.043</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>davies_2013</td>
<td>Canada</td>
<td>1376</td>
<td>Reading</td>
<td>SES2</td>
<td>0.011</td>
<td>0.004</td>
<td>0.011</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>dumont_2020/quinn_2016</td>
<td>USA</td>
<td>3630</td>
<td>Reading</td>
<td>SES3</td>
<td>-0.021</td>
<td>0.005</td>
<td>-0.018</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>dumont_2020/quinn_2016</td>
<td>USA</td>
<td>3630</td>
<td>Maths</td>
<td>SES3</td>
<td>-0.001</td>
<td>0.005</td>
<td>0.000</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>dumont_2020/quinn_2016</td>
<td>USA</td>
<td>3750</td>
<td>Reading</td>
<td>SES3</td>
<td>0.016</td>
<td>0.006</td>
<td>0.017</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>dumont_2020/quinn_2016</td>
<td>USA</td>
<td>3740</td>
<td>Maths</td>
<td>SES3</td>
<td>0.043</td>
<td>0.006</td>
<td>0.041</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>lindahl_2001</td>
<td>Sweden</td>
<td>556</td>
<td>Maths</td>
<td>SES4</td>
<td>0.009</td>
<td>0.024</td>
<td>0.017</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>meyer_2017</td>
<td>Germany</td>
<td>51</td>
<td>Other</td>
<td>Parental occupation5</td>
<td>-0.019</td>
<td>0.057</td>
<td>0.018</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>meyer_2017</td>
<td>Germany</td>
<td>51</td>
<td>Reading</td>
<td>Parental occupation5</td>
<td>0.113</td>
<td>0.076</td>
<td>0.028</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>paechter_2015</td>
<td>Austria</td>
<td>180</td>
<td>Maths</td>
<td>Mother’s education6</td>
<td>0.073</td>
<td>0.013</td>
<td>0.059</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>verachtert_2009</td>
<td>Belgium</td>
<td>829</td>
<td>Maths</td>
<td>SES7</td>
<td>0.012</td>
<td>0.029</td>
<td>0.019</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>vonhippel_2019</td>
<td>USA</td>
<td>17779</td>
<td>Maths</td>
<td>FRPL status8</td>
<td>0.014</td>
<td>0.005</td>
<td>0.014</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>vonhippel_2019</td>
<td>USA</td>
<td>17779</td>
<td>Reading</td>
<td>FRPL status8</td>
<td>0.015</td>
<td>0.004</td>
<td>0.015</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>vonhippel_2019</td>
<td>USA</td>
<td>790</td>
<td>Reading</td>
<td>FRPL status8</td>
<td>0.033</td>
<td>0.014</td>
<td>0.030</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>vonhippel_2019</td>
<td>USA</td>
<td>790</td>
<td>Maths</td>
<td>FRPL status8</td>
<td>0.047</td>
<td>0.012</td>
<td>0.041</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Study\_year: first author, and the year in which the study was
published; Country; n\_students: number of students reported in the
study; Subject: “Other” represents either the general knowledge test in
the ECLS-K study, or writing tests; Disadvantage definition: 1 Composite
measure of parents' education, parents' occupational prestige, and
household income; 2 composite measure of parent education, other parent
education, income each standardised and summed; 3 NCES-created
socioeconomic status (SES) variable, which is a composite of family
income, parental education, and occupational prestige; 4 Census-based
measure, combining the mean income and mean parental years education on
the block of the relevant student, among households on that block where
parents are aged 28-54 and kids are aged 10-12; 5 Highest Socio-Economic
Index of Occupational Status; 6 Binary indicator for whether or not a
mother sat the university entrance exam; 7 Composite measure including
the educational level of both parents, the professional status of both
parents, and the household income; 8Free and Reduced Price Lunch status.
Delta\_gap \[Δ\]: main outcome variable defined as the rate of change in
the gap between FSM6 and nonFSM6 pupils, measured in effect-size units
per month. SE\_Delta\_gap: (SE(Δ)): standard error of Δ

Source: Education Endowment Foundation (2020). Impact of school closures
on the attainment gap: Rapid Evidence Assessment. London: Education
Endowment Foundation, Table 2. Available at: <https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/public/files/EEF_(2020)_-_Impact_of_School_Closures_on_the_Attainment_Gap.pdf>


### Acknowledgements

In addition to those participating in the DELVE Initiative, the
following provided input that helped inform this report: Evropi
Theodoratou, Xue Li, Wei Xu, Marshall Dozier, Yazhou He, Amir Kirolos,
Zhongyu Lang, William Browne, Mike Campbell, Nick Latimer, Sukriti
Verma, Robbie Coleman, Carole Willis, Caroline Sharp, Monica Costa Dias,
Harry Campbell, Ruth McQuilian, Harish Nair, Emilie McSwiggan, Gerry
Fowkes; Halima Abiola, Gareth Andrews, Sarah Haythornthwaite, Rob
Benzies, CUSP (Cambridge University Cross-Disciplinary Special Interest
Group for Policy related to children and young people), Osama Rahman,
Gary Lewis, Jonathan Simons, Stephen Sparks, Russell Viner, and two
anonymous school leaders.


## Footnotes and References

[^1]: GOV.UK (2020) *Education plans from September 2020*. Available at
    <https://www.gov.uk/guidance/education-plans-from-september-2020>
    \[Accessed 9th July 2020\].

[^2]: There are a range of other education related issues arising from
    this pandemic, such as its impact on students’ progression to
    university, the loss of apprenticeships or the impact of the
    economic crisis on the graduate unemployment rate. However, in this
    report we focus exclusively on the issue of school closures.

[^3]: WHO, UNICEF & IFRC (2020) Key Messages and Actions for COVID-19
    Prevention and Control in Schools. Available at:
    https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/key-messages-and-actions-for-COVID-19-prevention-and-control-in-schools-march-2020.pdf?sfvrsn=baf81d52\_4&download=true
    \[Accessed 2 July 2020\].

[^4]: WHO (2020) *Considerations for school-related public health
    measures in the context of COVID-19*. Available at:
    <https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/considerations-for-school-related-public-health-measures-in-the-context-of-covid-19>
    \[Accessed 1st July 2020\].

[^5]: UNICEF, the World Bank, the World Food Programme and UNHCR (2020)
    Framework for reopening schools. Available at:
    <https://www.unicef.org/sites/default/files/2020-06/Framework-for-reopening-schools-2020.pdf>
    \[Accessed 2 July 2020\].

[^6]: Office for National Statistics (2020) Coronavirus (COVID-19)
    infections in the community in England: July 2020. Characteristics
    of people testing positive for the coronavirus (COVID-19) in England
    from the COVID-19 Infection Survey. 7 July 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/articles/coronavirusCOVID19infectionsinthecommunityinengland/july2020>.

[^7]: Pollán, M. et al (2020) Prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in Spain
    (ENE-COVID): a nationwide, population-based seroepidemiological
    study. *The Lancet*, to appear. [doi:
    10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31483-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31483-5).

[^8]: Lavezzo, E. et al. (2020) Suppression of a SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in
    the Italian municipality of Vò, *Nature* (2020), to appear. [doi:
    10.1038/s41586-020-2488-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2488-1)

[^9]: Gudbjartsson, D.F. et al. (2020) Spread of SARS-CoV-2 in the
    Icelandic Population, *N. Engl. J. Med.* 382 (2020), pp.
    2302-2315.[doi:
    10.1056/NEJMoa2006100](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa2006100)

[^10]: Public Health Agency of Sweden (2020) Initial results from
    ongoing investigation of antibodies to COVID-19 virus, 20 May
    2020.Available at:
    [https://www.folkhalsomyndigheten.se/nyheter-och-press/nyhetsarkiv/2020/maj/forsta-resultaten-fran-pagaende-undersokning-av-antikroppar-for-COVID-19-virus/](https://www.folkhalsomyndigheten.se/nyheter-och-press/nyhetsarkiv/2020/maj/forsta-resultaten-fran-pagaende-undersokning-av-antikroppar-for-covid-19-virus/)

[^11]: Birrell, P. et al. (2020) COVID-19: Nowcast and Forecast, 13 July
    2020. Available at: <https://www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk/now-casting/>

[^12]: Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (2019) Estimated
    influenza illnesses, medical visits, hospitalizations and deaths in
    the United States, 2018-19 influenza season. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/burden/2018-2019.html</span>](https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/burden/2018-2019.html).

[^13]: Birrell, P. et al. (2020) COVID-19: Nowcast and Forecast,
    13<sup>th</sup> July 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk/now-casting/>

[^14]: Ferguson, N. et al. (2020) Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical
    interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID-19 mortality and healthcare
    demand. Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team, 16<sup>th</sup>
    March 2020. [doi: 10.25561/77482](https://doi.org/10.25561/77482).

[^15]: The Kids Corona Platform, SJD Barcelona Children’s Hospital.
    Further information available at:
    <https://www.sjdhospitalbarcelona.org/en/kidscorona>

[^16]: Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health (2020) PIMS: the
    COVID-19 linked syndrome affecting children – information for
    families. Available at:
    [https://www.rcpch.ac.uk/resources/pims-COVID-19-linked-syndrome-affecting-children-information-families](https://www.rcpch.ac.uk/resources/pims-covid-19-linked-syndrome-affecting-children-information-families).

[^17]: Davies, P. et al. (2020) Intensive care admissions of children
    with paediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally
    associated with SARS-CoV-2 (PIMS-TS) in the UK: a multicentre
    observational study. *The Lancet*, to appear. [doi:
    10.1016/S2352-4642(20)30215-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2352-4642(20)30215-7)

[^18]: Paediatric Intensive Care Audit Network (2019) Annual Report
    2019. Available at:
    <https://www.picanet.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/sites/25/2019/12/PICANet-2019-Annual-Report-Summary_v1.0.pdf>

[^19]: #  Li, W. et al. (2020) Characteristics of Household Transmission of COVID-19. *Clin. Infec. Dis.* ciaa450, [doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa450](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa450).

[^20]: Jing, Q-L. et al. (2020) Household secondary attack rate of
    COVID-19 and associated determinants in Guangzhou, China: a
    retrospective cohort study. *Lancet Infec. Dis.,* to appear. [doi:
    10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30471-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30471-0).

[^21]: Mizumoto, K. et al (2020) Age specificity of cases and attack
    rate of novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19). medRxiv preprint.
    [doi:
    10.1101/2020.03.09.20033142](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.09.20033142).

[^22]: Zhang, J. et al. (2020) Changes in contact patterns shape the
    dynamics of the COVID-19 outbreak in China, *Science* 368 (2020),
    1481-1486. doi:
    [10.1126/science.abb8001](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/368/6498/1481)

[^23]: Bi, Q. et al. (2020) Epidemiology and transmission of COVID-19 in
    391 cases and 1286 of their close contacts in Shenzen, China: a
    retrospective cohort study. *Lancet Infec. Dis.* 2020, to appear.
    [doi:
    10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30287-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30287-5).

[^24]: Boast, A. et al. (2020) An evidence summary of paediatric
    COVID-19 literature, Don’t Forget the Bubbles, 2020. Available at
    <http://doi.org/10.31440/DFTB.24063>.

[^25]: Hayward, AC. et al. (2014) Comparative community burden and
    severity of seasonal and pandemic influenza: results of the Flu
    Watch cohort study. *The Lancet Respiratory Medicine* 2 (2014),
    445-454. [doi:
    10.1016/S2213-2600(14)70034-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(14)70034-7)

[^26]: Baguelin, M. et al. (2013) Assessing optimal target populations
    for influenza vaccination programmes: an evidence synthesis and
    modelling study. PLoS Med. 10, 1-19. [doi:
    10.1371/journal.pmed.1001527](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001527)

[^27]: New South Wales Government and National Centre for Immunization
    and Surveillance (2020) COVID-19 in schools – the experience in NSW.
    Published 26 April 2020. Available at:
    <http://ncirs.org.au/sites/default/files/2020-04/NCIRS%20NSW%20Schools%20COVID_Summary_FINAL%20public_26%20April%202020.pdf>

[^28]: Yung, C.F. et al (2020) Novel Coronavirus 2019 Transmission Risk
    in Educational Settings. *Clin. Infec. Dis.* ciaa794. [doi:
    10.1093/cid/ciaa794](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa794).

[^29]: Heavey, L. et al. (2002) No evidence of secondary transmission of
    COVID-19 from children attending school in Ireland, 2020.
    Eurosurveillance 25 (2002). [doi:
    10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.21.2000903](https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.21.2000903).

[^30]: Fontanet, A. et al (2020) Cluster of Covid-19 in Northern France:
    A retrospective closed cohort study. *medRxiv* preprint, 23 April
    2020. [doi:
    10.1101/2020.04.18.20071134](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.18.20071134).

[^31]: Kadari-Ovadia, S. et al. (2020) Schools in Jerusalem shut as
    dozens of students, staff test positive for virus, *Haaretz*,
    1<sup>st</sup> June 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-half-of-new-coronavirus-cases-in-schools-came-from-single-school-in-jerusalem-1.8885755>

[^32]: Torres, JP. et al (2020) SARS-CoV-2 antibody prevalence in blood
    in a large school community subject to a Covid-19 outbreak: a
    cross-sectional study. *Clin. Infect. Dis.* ciaa955, [doi:
    10.1093/cid/ciaa955](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa955).

[^33]: A project, led by John Jerrim at UCL, is planned to undertake a
    comprehensive assessment of teachers’ health in England drawing on
    numerous national survey data sets, including UK Biobank and the
    OECD’s Teaching and Learning International Survey (TALIS).

[^34]: UK Government (2020) Ethnicity facts and figures. Available at:
    <https://www.ethnicity-facts-figures.service.gov.uk/uk-population-by-ethnicity/demographics/families-and-households/latest#asian-ethnic-group-by-household-type>.

[^35]: Office for National Statistics (2020) One in eight British
    households has no garden. Available at:
    <https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/environmentalaccounts/articles/oneineightbritishhouseholdshasnogarden/2020-05-14>

[^36]: Office for National Statistics (2020) Deaths involving COVID-19
    by local area and socioeconomic deprivation: deaths occurring
    between 1 March and 31 May 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/deathsinvolvingCOVID19bylocalareasanddeprivation/deathsoccurringbetween1marchand31may2020>.

[^37]: Guan, W. et al. (2020) Comorbidity and its impact on 1590
    patients with COVID-19 in China: a nationwide analysis. European
    Respiratory Journal. 55(5): 2000547 [doi:
    10.1183/13993003.00547-2020](https://erj.ersjournals.com/content/early/2020/03/17/13993003.00547-2020)

[^38]: UK Government (2020) Ethnicity facts and figures. Available at:
    http:www.ethnicity-facts-figures.service.gov.uk/health/diet-and-exercise/overweight-adults/latest

[^39]: Yang, J. et al. (2020) Prevalence of comorbities and its effects
    in patients infected with SARS-CoV-2: a systematic review and
    meta-analysis. International Journal of Infections Diseases. 94:
    91-95. [doi:
    10.1016/j.ijid.2020.03.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.03.017)

[^40]: Goff, LM. (2019) Ethnicity and Type 2 diabetes in the UK.
    Diabetic Medicine. 36: 927-938 12 [doi:
    10.1111/dme.13895](https://doi.org/10.1111/dme.13895)

[^41]: Shekerdemian, L. et al. (2020) Characteristics and Outcomes of
    Children with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Infection Admitted
    to US and Canadian Pediatric Intensive Care Units. *Jama Pediatric*
    [doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2020.1948](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapediatrics/fullarticle/2766037)

[^42]: Nelson, A. (2002) Unequal treatment: confronting racial and
    ethnic disparities in health care. Journal of National Medical
    Association. 94(8): 666-668. [doi:
    10.17226/12875](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25032386/)

[^43]: Anderson, KO. et al. (2009) Racial and ethnic disparities in
    pain: Causes and consequences of unequal care. J Pain;
    10(12):1187-1204. [doi:
    10.1016/j.jpain.2009.10.002](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19944378/)

[^44]: Bonham, VL.( 2001) Race, ethnicity and pain treatment: Striving
    to understand the causes and solutions to the disparities in pain
    treatment. J Law Med Ethics. 29(1):52-68 [doi:
    10.1111/j.1748-720X.2001.tb00039.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1748-720X.2001.tb00039.x)

[^45]: UK Government (2020) Ethnicity facts and figures. Available at:
    [<span
    class="underline">https://www.ethnicity-facts-figures.service.gov.uk/uk-population-by-ethnicity/demographics/families-and-households/latest\#asian-ethnic-group-by-household-type</span>](https://www.ethnicity-facts-figures.service.gov.uk/uk-population-by-ethnicity/demographics/families-and-households/latest#asian-ethnic-group-by-household-type).

[^46]: Siddiqi, A. et al. (2017) Associations between race,
    discrimination and risk for chronic disease in a population-based
    sample from Canada. Soc Sci Med,194:135-141. [doi:
    10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.10.009](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29100138/)

[^47]: Viner, R., Russell, S., Croker, H., Packer, J., Ward, J.,
    Stansfield, C., Mytton, O. and Booy, R. (2020) School Closure and
    Management Practices During Coronavirus Outbreaks Including
    COVID-19: A Rapid Narrative Systematic Review. *SSRN Electronic
    Journal*, [doi:
    10.2139/ssrn.3556648](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32272089/).

[^48]: Jones, E., Young, A., Clevenger, K., Salimifard, P., Wu, E.,
    Lahaie Luna, M., Lahvis, M., Lang, J., Bliss, M., Azimi, P.,
    Cedeno-Laurent, J., Wilson, C., Allen, J. (2020) Healthy Schools:
    Risk Reduction Strategies for Reopening Schools. Harvard T.H. Chan
    School of Public Health Healthy Buildings program. Available at:
    <https://schools.forhealth.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/19/2020/06/Harvard-Healthy-Buildings-Program-Schools-For-Health-Reopening-Covid19-June2020.pdf>

[^49]: Clalit Health Services, (2020). חולי קורונה בישראל: תמונת מצב \|
    שירותי בריאות כללית. Accessed July 19, 2020. Available at:
    <https://www.clalit.co.il/he/your_health/family/Pages/corona_in_israel.aspx>

[^50]: Our World in Data (2020) Data source available at
    <https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/weekly-COVID-cases?tab=chart&country=DEU~NLD~GBR>
    \[Accessed 26 June 2020\]

[^51]: Flaxman, S. et al. (2020) Estimating the effects of
    non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in Europe. Nature(2020)
    [doi:
    10.1038/s41586-020-2405-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2405-7)

[^52]: Thelocal.de (2020) Schools in German district to close after 400
    meat factory workers test positive for coronavirus. Available at:
    <https://www.thelocal.de/20200617/schools-and-kitas-in-german-district-to-close-after-400-workers-at-meat-factory-test-positive-for-coronavirus>
    \[Accessed 23rd June 2020\].

[^53]: BBC News (2020) Germany not alarmed by infection rate rise.
    Available at: <https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-52632369>
    \[Accessed May 12, 2020\]

[^54]: BR24. (2020). Corona An Schulen: Quarantäne Für Fast 100 Menschen
    In Neu-Ulm. Available at:
    <https://www.br.de/nachrichten/bayern/corona-an-schulen-quarantaene-fuer-fast-100-menschen-in-neu-ulm,S3K1Li1>
    \[Accessed 19 July\]

[^55]: ynetnews. (2020). Israel To Reopen Schools On September 1 With
    Major Virus Adjustments. Available at:
    <https://www.ynetnews.com/article/ByTW6IXkw> \[Accessed 19 July
    2020\]

[^56]: DELVE Initiative (2020), Face Masks for the General Public. DELVE
    Report No. 1. Published 04 May 2020. Available from
    <http://rs-delve.github.io/reports/2020/05/04/face-masks-for-the-general-public.html>.

[^57]: Services.aap.org. (2020). COVID-19 Planning Considerations:
    Guidance For School Re-Entry. Available at:
    <https://services.aap.org/en/pages/2019-novel-coronavirus-COVID-19-infections/clinical-guidance/COVID-19-planning-considerations-return-to-in-person-education-in-schools/>
    \[Accessed 19 July 2020\]

[^58]: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020). Communities,
    Schools, Workplaces, & Events. Availble from
    <https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/schools-childcare/schools.html>
    \[Accessed 19 July 2020\]

[^59]: Lewkowicz, D. J. & Hansen-Tift, A. (2012). Infants deploy
    selective attention to the mouth of a talking face when learning
    speech. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA,
    109(5), 1431-1436. [doi:
    10.1073/pnas.1114783109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1114783109)

[^60]: Barenholtz, E., Mavica, L., & Lewkowicz, D. J. (2016). Language
    familiarity modulates relative attention to the eyes and mouth of a
    talker. Cognition, 147, 100-105. [doi:
    10.1016/j.cognition.2015.11.013](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26649759/)

[^61]: Holgate, S. et al (2020) Preparing for a challenging winter,
    2020/21. *Academy of Medical Sciences*, 14 July 2020. Available
    from: <https://acmedsci.ac.uk/file-download/51353957>.

[^62]: Cunha, F. and Heckman, J.J. (2008). Formulating, identifying and
    estimating the technology of cognitive and noncognitive skill
    formation. *Journal of human resources*, *43*(4), pp.738-782.

[^63]: Carlsson, M., Dahl, G. B., Öckert, B. and Rooth, D. (2015) The
    Effect of Schooling on Cognitive Skills. Review of Economics and
    Statistics vol. 97(3) pp. 533–547.

[^64]: Lavy. V. (2015) Do Differences in Schools' Instruction Time
    Explain International Achievement Gaps? Evidence from Developed and
    Developing Countries. Economic Journal vol 125,

[^65]: Burgess, S. and Sievertsen H.H (2020) Schools, skills, and
    learning: The impact of COVID-19 on education. The Centre for
    Economic Policy Research. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://voxeu.org/article/impact-COVID-19-
    education</span>](https://voxeu.org/article/impact-covid-19-%20education)

[^66]: Goodman, J. (2014). Flaking out: Student absences and snow days
    as disruptions of instructional time (No. w20221). National Bureau
    of Economic Research.

[^67]: Aucejo, E.M. and Romano, T.F. (2016) Assessing the effect of
    school days and absences on test score performance. *Economics of
    Education Review*, *55*, pp.70-87.

[^68]: Cattan, S., Kamhöfer, D., Karlsson, M. and Nilsson, T., 2017. The
    short-and long-term effects of student absence: evidence from
    Sweden. Institute of Labor Economics, IZA DP 10995.

[^69]: Sacerdote, B. (2012) When the Saints Go Marching Out: Long-Term
    Outcomes for Student Evacuees from Hurricanes Katrina and
    Rita. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1):109-35.

[^70]: Hattie, J. (2020) Visible Learning Effect Sizes When Schools Are
    Closed: What Matters and What Does Not. mimeo. Availale at:
    <https://opsoa.org/application/files/2215/8689/0389/Infuences-during-Corona-JH-article.pdf>

[^71]: Beaglehole, B., Bell, C. Frampton, C, and Moor, St. (2017) The
    impact of the Canterbury earthquakes on successful school leaving
    for adolescents. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public
    Health. Vol 41 (1) pp. 70-73.

[^72]: Cooper, H., Nye, B., Charlton, K., Lindsay, J., & Greathouse, S.
    (1996). The Effects of Summer Vacation on Achievement Test Scores: A
    Narrative and Meta-Analytic Review. *Review of Educational
    Research*, *66*(3), 227–268. [<span class="underline">doi:
    10.3102/00346543066003227</span>](https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543066003227)

[^73]: von Hippel, P. T. and Hamrock, C. (2019). Do test score gaps grow
    before, during, or between the school years? Measurement artifacts
    and what we can know in spite of them. Sociological Science, 6,
    43-80

[^74]: #  See von Hippel, P. T. (2019) Summer Learning: Key Findings Fail to Replicate, but Programs Still Have Promise. Education Next, [<span class="underline">https://www.educationnext.org/summer-learning-key-findings-fail-replicate-but-programs-still-promise/</span>](https://www.educationnext.org/summer-learning-key-findings-fail-replicate-but-programs-still-promise/) and Von Hippel, P. T. (2019) Is Summer Learning Loss Real? Education Next. Vol 19, no. 4. [<span class="underline">https://www.educationnext.org/is-summer-learning-loss-real-how-i-lost-faith-education-research-results/</span>](https://www.educationnext.org/is-summer-learning-loss-real-how-i-lost-faith-education-research-results/)

[^75]: Atteberry, A. and McEachin, A. (2019). School's Out: The Role of
    Summers in Understanding Achievement Disparities. (EdWorkingPaper:
    19-82). Retrieved from Annenberg Institute at Brown University:
    [doi: 10.26300/2mam-bp02](https://doi.org/10.26300/2mam-bp02)

[^76]: Portes, J, (2020) The lasting scars of the Covid-19 crisis:
    Channels and impacts. VOX-EU. Available at: <span
    class="underline">[https://voxeu.org/article/lasting
    -scars-COVID-19-crisis](https://voxeu.org/article/lasting%20-scars-covid-19-crisis)</span>

[^77]: Jaume, D. and Willén, A. (2019) The Long-Run Effects of Teacher
    Strikes: Evidence from Argentina. Journal of Labor Economics vol.
    37(4) pp. 1097 – 1139

[^78]: Jaume, D. and Willén, A. (2019) The Long-Run Effects of Teacher
    Strikes: Evidence from Argentina. Journal of Labor Economics vol.
    37(4) pp. 1097 – 1139

[^79]: Office for National Statistics (2014) Intergenerational
    transmission of disadvantage in the UK & EU. Available at:

    [<span
    class="underline">http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160105160709/http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/household-income/intergenerational-transmission-of-poverty-in-the-uk---eu/2014/sty-causes-of-poverty-uk.html</span>](http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160105160709/http:/www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/household-income/intergenerational-transmission-of-poverty-in-the-uk---eu/2014/sty-causes-of-poverty-uk.html).
    Note that the ONS explicitly set this as the effect of education
    directly: “… the Individual’s assessment of their childhood
    household financial situation is not a significant predictor of
    poverty once educational attainment is accounted for.”

[^80]: Bennett, J., Pearson-Stuttard, J., Kontis, V., Capewell, S.,
    Wolfe, I., and Ezzati, M. (2018) Contributions of diseases and
    injuries to widening life expectancy inequalities in England from
    2001 to 2016: a population-based analysis of vital registration
    data. The Lancet Nov 22. [<span class="underline">doi:
    10.1016/S2468-2667(18)30214-7</span>](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2468-2667(18)30214-7)
    .

[^81]: Cattan, S., Conti, G., Farquharson, C. and Ginja, R., 2019. The
    health effects of Sure Start. Institute for Fiscal Studies.
    Available at: <https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/14139>

[^82]: Montacute, R. (2020) Social Mobility and COVID-19. Sutton Trust
    Report [<span
    class="underline">https://www.suttontrust.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/COVID-19-and-Social-Mobility-1.pdf</span>](https://www.suttontrust.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/COVID-19-and-Social-Mobility-1.pdf)

[^83]: Burgess, S. and Vignoles A. (2020) The Covid-19 crisis and
    educational inequality. Campaign for Social Science. Available at:
    [<span
    class="underline">https://campaignforsocialscience.org.uk/news/the-COVID-19-crisis-and-educational-inequality/</span>](https://campaignforsocialscience.org.uk/news/the-covid-19-crisis-and-educational-inequality/)

[^84]: Education Endowment Foundation (2020). Impact of school closures
    on the attainment gap: Rapid Evidence Assessment. London: Education
    Endowment Foundation. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/public/files/EEF\_(2020)\_-\_Impact\_of\_School\_Closures\_on\_the\_Attainment\_Gap.pdf</span>](https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/public/files/EEF_(2020)_-_Impact_of_School_Closures_on_the_Attainment_Gap.pdf)

[^85]: von Hippel, P. and Hamrock, C. (2019) Do Test Score Gaps Grow
    Before, During, or Between the School Years? Measurement Artifacts
    and What We Can Know in Spite of Them. Sociological Science, 6,
    pp.43-80. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://sociologicalscience.com/articles-v6-3-43/</span>](https://sociologicalscience.com/articles-v6-3-43/)

[^86]: Meyer F., Meissel, K., & McNaughton, S. (2017). Patterns of
    literacy learning in German primary schools over the summer and the
    influence of home literacy practices. Journal of Research in Reading
    40(3), pp.233-253.

[^87]: Lindahl, M. (2001). Summer Learning and the Effect of Schooling:
    Evidence from Sweden. IZA

    Discussion Paper No. 262. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://www.iza.org/publications/dp/262/summer-learningand-the-effect-of-schooling-evidence-from-sweden</span>](https://www.iza.org/publications/dp/262/summer-learningand-the-effect-of-schooling-evidence-from-sweden).

[^88]: Dumont, H. and Ready, D. (2020). Do Schools Reduce or Exacerbate
    Inequality? How the Associations Between Student Achievement and
    Achievement Growth Influence Our Understanding of the Role of
    Schooling. American Educational Research Journal, 57(2), pp.728-774.

[^89]: Quinn D., Cooc, N., McIntyre, J. and Gomez, C. (2016). Seasonal
    dynamics of academic achievement inequality by socioeconomic status
    and race/ethnicity: Updating and extending past research with new
    national data. Educational Researcher, 45(8), pp.443-453.

[^90]: Department for Education (2019) Key Stage 4 Performance 2019.
    Available at:
    <https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/863815/2019_KS4_revised_text.pdf>

[^91]: Strand, S. (2014) Ethnicity, gender, social class and achievement
    gaps at age 16: Intersectionality and ‘Getting it’ for the white
    working class. *Research Papers in Education*, *29*(2), pp.131-171.

[^92]: Full Fact (2020) Black Caribbean pupils three times more likely
    to be excluded. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://fullfact.org/education/black-caribbean-pupils-three-times-more-likely-be-excluded/</span>](https://fullfact.org/education/black-caribbean-pupils-three-times-more-likely-be-excluded/)
    Accessed \[June 23, 2020\].

[^93]: Office of National Statistics (2020) Child poverty and education
    outcomes by ethnicity. Available at:
    <https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/nationalaccounts/uksectoraccounts/compendium/economicreview/february2020/childpovertyandeducationoutcomesbyethnicity>.
    Accessed \[June 23, 2020\].

[^94]: Gillborn, D., Demack, S., Rollock, N. and Warmington, P. (2017)
    Moving the goalposts: Education policy and 25 years of the
    Black/White achievement gap. *British Educational Research Journal*,
    *43*(5), pp.848-874.

[^95]: Shand-Baptiste, K. (2020) UK Schools have targeted black children
    for generations-the education system is overdue for a reckoning. The
    Independent. [<span
    class="underline">https://www.independent.co.uk/voices/school-racism-black-students-exclusions-hair-kiss-teeth-a9280296.html</span>](https://www.independent.co.uk/voices/school-racism-black-students-exclusions-hair-kiss-teeth-a9280296.html)

[^96]: Ethnicity Facts and Figures (2019) Destinations and earnings of
    graduates after higher education. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://www.ethnicity-facts-figures.service.gov.uk/education-skills-and-training/after-education/destinations-and-earnings-of-graduates-after-higher-education/latest\#average-earnings-of-graduates-by-ethnicity</span>](https://www.ethnicity-facts-figures.service.gov.uk/education-skills-and-training/after-education/destinations-and-earnings-of-graduates-after-higher-education/latest#average-earnings-of-graduates-by-ethnicity).
    Accessed \[June 22, 2020\]

[^97]: Office of National Statistics (2020) Child poverty and education
    outcomes by ethnicity. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/nationalaccounts/uksectoraccounts/compendium/economicreview/february2020/childpovertyandeducationoutcomesbyethnicity</span>](https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/nationalaccounts/uksectoraccounts/compendium/economicreview/february2020/childpovertyandeducationoutcomesbyethnicity).
    Accessed \[June 23, 2020\].

[^98]: Sutton Trust (2020) Coronavirus and Social Mobility Impact Brief
    \#1: School Shutdown. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://www.suttontrust.com/our-research/coronavirus-and-social-mobility-impact-brief</span>](https://www.suttontrust.com/our-research/coronavirus-and-social-mobility-impact-brief/)/.

[^99]: Andrew, A., Cattan, S., Costa-Dias, M., Farquharson, C.,
    Kraftman, L., Krutikova, S., Phimister, A. and Sevilla, A. (2020).
    Learning During the Lockdown: Real-Time Data on Children’s
    Experiences During Home Learning. IFS Briefing Note BN288. Available
    at: [<span class="underline">https://www.ifs.org.uk
    /uploads/BN288-Learning-during-the-lockdown-1.pdf</span>](https://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/Edited_Final-BN288%20Learning%20during%20the%20lockdown.pdf)

[^100]: National Foundation for Educational Research (2020). Pupil
    engagement in remote learning. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://www.nfer.ac.uk/media/4073/schools\_responses\_to\_COVID\_19\_pupil\_engagement\_in\_remote\_learning.pdf</span>](https://www.nfer.ac.uk/media/4073/schools_responses_to_covid_19_pupil_engagement_in_remote_learning.pdf)

[^101]: The study was funded by the Nuffield Foundation and NFER.

[^102]: Julius, J. and Sims, D. (2020). Schools’ Response to Covid-19:
    Support for Vulnerable Pupils and the Children of Keyworkers.
    (Forthcoming). Lucas, M., Nelson, J. and Sims, D. (2020). *Schools’
    Responses to Covid-19: Pupil Engagement in Remote Learning*.
    \[online\]. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://www.nfer.ac.uk/media/4073/schools\_responses\_to\_COVID\_19\_pupil\_engagement\_in\_remote\_learning.pdf</span>](https://www.nfer.ac.uk/media/4073/schools_responses_to_covid_19_pupil_engagement_in_remote_learning.pdf)
    \[19 June 2020\]. Sharp, C., Sims, D and Rutt, S. (2020). *School’s
    Responses to Covid-19: Returning Pupils to School* \[online\].
    Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://www.nfer.ac.uk/media/4060/schools\_responses\_to\_‌COVID\_19\_early\_report\_final.pdf</span>](https://www.nfer.ac.uk/media/4060/schools_responses_to_covid_19_early_report_final.pdf)
    \[19 June, 2020\].

[^103]: See page 19, Education Endowment Foundation (2019) Remote
    Learning: Rapid Evidence Assessment. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/public/files/Publications/Covid-19\_Resources/Remote\_learning\_evidence\_review/Remote\_Learning\_Rapid\_Evidence\_Assessment.pdf</span>](https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/public/files/Publications/Covid-19_Resources/Remote_learning_evidence_review/Remote_Learning_Rapid_Evidence_Assessment.pdf)

[^104]: Means, B., Toyama, Y., Murphy, R., & Baki, M. (2013). The
    effectiveness of online and blended learning: A meta-analysis of the
    empirical literature. *Teachers College Record, 115*(3), 1–47.
    Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2013-11078-005</span>](https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2013-11078-005)

[^105]: Andrew, A., Cattan, S., Costa Dias, M., Farquharson, C.,
    Kraftman, L., Krutikova, S., Phimister, A. and Sevilla, A. (2020)
    How are mothers and fathers balancing work and family under
    lockdown? IFS Briefing Note 290. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/BN290-Mothers-and-fathers-balancing-work-and-life-under-lockdown.pdf</span>](https://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/BN290-Mothers-and-fathers-balancing-work-and-life-under-lockdown.pdf)

[^106]: NFER (2020) *Returning Pupils to Schools. Available at:* [<span
    class="underline">https://www.nfer.ac.uk/media/4060/schools\_responses\_to\_COVID\_19\_early\_report\_final.pdf</span>](https://www.nfer.ac.uk/media/4060/schools_responses_to_covid_19_early_report_final.pdf)

[^107]: Andrew, A., Cattan, S., Costa-Dias, M., Farquharson, C.,
    Kraftman, L., Krutikova, S., Phimister, A. and Sevilla, A.. (2020)
    Learning during the lockdown: real-time data on children’s
    experiences during home learning.
    <https://dera.ioe.ac.uk/35632/1/BN288-Learning-during-the-lockdown-1.pdf>

[^108]: Department for Education (2020) COVID-19 and attendance
    statistics [<span
    class="underline">https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-COVID-19-attendance-in-education-and-early-years-settings</span>](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-attendance-in-education-and-early-years-settings)

[^109]: Economists analyse the formation of skills as a production
    process, with inputs and outputs (see Cunha, F. and Heckman, J.
    (2007) The technology of skill formation. American Economic Review
    97, pp. 31–47; Cunha, F., Heckman, J. and Schennach, S. (2010)
    Estimating the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill
    Formation. Econometrica vol. 78(3) pp. 883–931.

[^110]: For most pupils; the pupils of key workers were permitted to go
    to school, but attendance was very patchy and for those who did
    attend, it could not be classified as a normal learning experience.

[^111]: Although many secondary schools test their incoming year7 pupils
    to get a sense of their abilities.

[^112]: It may be that such tests are available from NFER: [<span
    class="underline">https://www.nfer.ac.uk/</span>](https://www.nfer.ac.uk/)

[^113]: New York Times (2020) Research shows students falling months
    behind. Available at:
    <https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/05/us/coronavirus-education-lost-learning.html?auth=login-email&login=email>

[^114]: See <https://tracktherecovery.org/>

[^115]: Economics Observatory (2020) What are the effects of coronavirus
    on the UK and US labour markets? Available at:
    <https://www.coronavirusandtheeconomy.com/question/what-are-effects-coronavirus-uk-and-us-labour-markets>

[^116]: Office for National Statistics (2020) Claimant Count and
    Vacancies Time Series. Availale at:
    <https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peoplenotinwork/unemployment/datasets/claimantcountandvacanciesdataset>

[^117]: Marmot, M., Allen, J., Goldblatt, P., Boyce, T., McNeish, D.,
    Grady, M. and Geddes, I. (2010) The Marmot review: Fair society,
    healthy lives. *Strategic review of health inequalities in England
    post-2010. London: The Marmot Review*.

[^118]: Bennett, J.E., Pearson-Stuttard, J., Kontis, V., Capewell, S.,
    Wolfe, I. and Ezzati, M. (2018) Contributions of diseases and
    injuries to widening life expectancy inequalities in England from
    2001 to 2016: a population-based analysis of vital registration
    data. *The Lancet Public Health*, *3*(12), pp.e586-e597.

[^119]: Cooper, K. and Stewart, K. (2017) Does money affect children’s
    outcomes? An update. Available at: [<span
    class="underline">http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/103494/</span>](http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/103494/)

[^120]: Stuckler, D., Basu, S., Suhrcke, M., Coutts, A. and McKee, M.
    (2009) The public health effect of economic crises and alternative
    policy responses in Europe: an empirical analysis. *Lancet*.
    2009;374(9686):315-323.
    [doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61124-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61124-7)

[^121]: Leon, D.A. (2016) Recessions and mortality: subtle but
    informative effects. *Lancet*. [doi:
    10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31712-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31712-3)

[^122]: Schneider, W., Waldfogel, J. and Brooks-Gunn, J. (2017) The
    Great Recession and risk for child abuse and neglect. *Children and
    youth services review*, *72*, pp.71-81.

[^123]: Wang, G., Zhang, Y., Zhao, J., Zhang, J. and Jiang, F. (2020)
    Mitigate the effects of home confinement on children during the
    COVID-19 outbreak. *The Lancet*, *395*(10228), pp.945-947. [doi:
    10.1016/
    S0140-6736(20)30547-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61124-7)

[^124]: Loades, ME., Chatburn, E., Higson-Sweeney, N., et al. (2020)
    Rapid Systematic Review: The Impact of Social Isolation and
    Loneliness on the Mental Health of Children and Adolescents in the
    Context of COVID-19. *J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.* 2020.
    doi: [10.1016/j.jaac.2020.05.009](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.jaac.2020.05.009)

[^125]: Brooks, SK., Webster, RK., Smith, LE. et al. (2020) The
    psychological impact of quarantine and how to reduce it: rapid
    review of the evidence. *Lancet.* 2020. [doi:
    10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30460-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30460-8)

[^126]: Reynolds, S., Shafran, R., Brigden, A. and Linney, C. (2020)
    Rapid Systematic Review: The Impact of Social Isolation and
    Loneliness on the Mental Health of Children and Adolescents in the
    Context of COVID-19, *J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.* 2020.
    doi: [10.1016/j.jaac.2020.05.009](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.jaac.2020.05.009)

[^127]: Crawley, E., Loades, M., Feder, G., Logan, S., Redwood, S. and
    Macleod, J. (2020) Wider collateral damage to children in the UK
    because of the social distancing measures designed to reduce the
    impact of COVID-19 in adults. *BMJ Paediatrics Open*, *4*(1).

[^128]: Gunnell, D., Appleby, L., Arensman, E., Hawton, K., John, A.,
    Kapur, N., Khan, M., O'Connor, R.C., Pirkis, J., Caine, E.D. and
    Chan, L.F. (2020) Suicide risk and prevention during the COVID-19
    pandemic. *The Lancet Psychiatry*, *7*(6), pp.468-471. [doi:
    10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30171-1](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32330430/)

[^129]: von Hippel, P.T. and Workman, J. (2016) From kindergarten
    through second grade, US children's obesity prevalence grows only
    during summer vacations. *Obesity*, *24*(11), pp.2296-2300. [doi:
    10.1002/oby.21613](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27804271/)

[^130]: Franckle, R., Adler, R. and Davison, K. (2014) Peer reviewed:
    accelerated weight gain among children during summer versus school
    year and related racial/ethnic disparities: a systematic review.
    *Preventing chronic disease*, *11*.
    doi: [10.5888/pcd11.130355](https://dx.doi.org/10.5888%2Fpcd11.130355)

[^131]: Brooks, S.K., Webster, R.K., Smith, L.E., Woodland, L., Wessely,
    S., Greenberg, N. and Rubin, G.J. (2020) The psychological impact of
    quarantine and how to reduce it: rapid review of the evidence. *The
    Lancet*. [doi:
    10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30460-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30460-8)

[^132]: Loades, ME., Chatburn, E., Higson-Sweeney, N. et al. (2020)
    Rapid Systematic Review: The Impact of Social Isolation and
    Loneliness on the Mental Health of Children and Adolescents in the
    Context of COVID-19. *J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.*
    doi: [10.1016/j.jaac.2020.05.009](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.jaac.2020.05.009)

[^133]: Goodenow, C. (1993). Classroom belonging among early adolescent
    students: Relationships to motivation and achievement. *Journal of
    Early Adolescence, 13*(1), 21-43. [doi:
    10.1177/0272431693013001002](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0272431693013001002)

[^134]: Burke, J., and Dempsey, M. (2020). *Covid-19 Practice in Primary
    Schools in Ireland Report*. [doi:
    10.13140/RG.2.2.14091.03369](https://www.into.ie/app/uploads/2020/04/Covid-19-Practice-in-Primary-Schools-Report-1.pdf)

[^135]: Deci, E. L., and Ryan, R. M. (2008). Facilitating optimal
    motivation and psychological well-being across life's domains.
    *Canadian Psychology, 49*(1), 14-23. [doi:
    10.1037/0708-5591.49.1.14](https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/0708-5591.49.1.14)

[^136]: Hawkley, L.C. and Cacioppo, J.T. (2010) Loneliness matters: A
    theoretical and empirical review of consequences and mechanisms.
    *Annals of behavioral medicine*, *40*(2), pp.218-227.
    doi: [10.1007/s12160-010-9210-8](https://dx.doi.org/10.1007%2Fs12160-010-9210-8)

[^137]: Caspi, A., Harrington, H., Moffitt, T.E., Milne, B.J. and
    Poulton, R. (2006) Socially isolated children 20 years later: risk
    of cardiovascular disease. *Archives of pediatrics & adolescent
    medicine*, *160*(8), pp.805-811. [doi:
    10.1001/archpedi.160.8.805](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16894079/)

[^138]: Orben, A., Tomova, L. and Blakemore, S.J., 2020. The effects of
    social deprivation on adolescent development and mental health. *The
    Lancet Child & Adolescent Health*. [doi:
    10.1016/S2352-4642(20)30186-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2352-4642(20)30186-3)

[^139]: Blakemore, S.J. and Mills, K.L. (2014) Is Adolescence a
    Sensitive Period for Sociocultural Processing? *Annu. Rev. Psychol.*
    **65**, 187–207 (2014) [doi:
    10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115202](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115202)

[^140]: Bould, H., Mars, B., Moran, P., Biddle, L., Gunnell, D. (2019)
    Rising suicide rates among adolescents in England and Wales. Lancet,
    394: 116–7. [doi:
    10.1016/S0140-6736(19)31102-X](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31227370/)

[^141]: McManus, S., Gunnell, D., Cooper, C. et al (2019) Prevalence of
    non-suicidal self-harm and service contact in England, 2000-14:
    repeated cross-sectional surveys of the general population. The
    Lancet Psychiatry, 6: 573–81. [doi:
    10.1016/S2215-0366(19)30188-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(19)30188-9)

[^142]: Hawton, K., Saunders, KEA., O’Connor, RC. (2012) Self-harm and
    suicide in adolescents. The Lancet, 379: 2373–82. [doi:
    10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60322-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60322-5)

[^143]: The National Child Mortality Database (2020) Child Suicide Rates
    during the COVID-19 Pandemic in England: Real-time Surveillance.
    Available at:
    <https://www.ncmd.info/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/REF253-2020-NCMD-Summary-Report-on-Child-Suicide-July-2020.pdf>

[^144]: Deighton, J., Humphrey, N., Belsky, J., Boehnke, J., Vostanis,
    P., and Patalay, P. (2017) Longitudinal pathways between mental
    health difficulties and academic performance during middle childhood
    and early adolescence. *The British Journal of Developmental
    Psychology*, Early View. [doi:
    10.1111/bjdp.12218](http://doi.org/10.1111/bjdp.12218)

[^145]: Panayiotou, M., & Humphrey, N. (2017). Mental health
    difficulties and academic attainment: Evidence for gender-specific
    developmental cascades in middle childhood. *Development and
    Psychopathology*, Early View, 1–16. [doi:
    10.1017/S095457941700102X](http://doi.org/10.1017/S095457941700102X)

[^146]: Sadler, K., Vizard, T., Ford, T., Marchesell, F., Pearce, N.,
    Mandalia, D., Davis, J., Brodie, E., Forbes, N., Goodman, A. and
    Goodman, R. (2018) Mental health of children and young people in
    England, 2017. NHS Digital report. Available at:
    <https://dera.ioe.ac.uk/32622/1/MHCYP%202017%20Summary.pdf>

[^147]: Walsh, G., Purdy, N., Dunn, J., Jones, S., Harrris, J. and
    Ballentine, M. (May 2020) *Home Schooling in Northern Ireland and
    during the COVID-19 Crisis.* *The experience of parents and carers.*
    CREU, Stranmillis College, Belfast

[^148]: Sadler K, Vizard T, Ford T, et al. (2018) *Mental health of
    children and young people in England: Summary of key findings.* NHS
    Digital. Available at:
    <https://dera.ioe.ac.uk/32622/1/MHCYP%202017%20Summary.pdf>

[^149]: Pearcey, S., Shum, A., Waite, P., Patalay, P.,Creswell, C.
    (2020) *Report 04: Changes in children and young people’s emotional
    and behavioural difficulties through lockdown.* Oxford: CoSPACE
    study; 16 June 2020 2020. Available at:
    <https://emergingminds.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/CoSPACE-Report-4-June-2020.pdf>

[^150]: Levita L (2020). *Initial research findings on the impact of
    COVID-19 on the well-being of young people aged 13 to 24 in the UK.*
    COVID-19 Psychological Research Consortium (C19PRC), University of
    Sheffield; 7 May 2020 2020.

[^151]: XenZone (2020) *Week 14: How Covid-19 is Affecting the Mental
    Health of Young People in the BAME Community. Published* 11 June
    2020. Available at:
    <https://xenzone.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/BAME_infographic_June-2020_WEB-v2.pdf>

[^152]: Viner, R., Patalay, P., Nicholls, D. et al. (2020) *You-COPE:
    Youth COVID Response Personal Experience : Tracking health and
    wellbeing amongst 16-24 year olds in the UK during and after the
    COVID-19 pandemic.* London: University College London (UCL).

[^153]: Children’s Commissioner for England (2020) Angry, fed up,
    isolated: Coronavirus and children’s mental health. Available at:
    [<span
    class="underline">https://www.childrenscommissioner.gov.uk/2020/04/03/angry-fed-up-isolated-coronavirus-and-childrens-mental-health/</span>](https://www.childrenscommissioner.gov.uk/2020/04/03/angry-fed-up-isolated-coronavirus-and-childrens-mental-health/).

[^154]: Emerging Minds (n.d.). Co-SPACE study. Further information
    available at: [Co-SPACE Study
    News](https://emergingminds.org.uk/co-space-study-news/)

[^155]: Ford, T., Vostanis, P., Meltzer, H., and Goodman, R. (2007).
    Psychiatric disorder among British children looked after by local
    authorities: comparison with children living in private households.
    *The British Journal of Psychiatry, 190*(4), 319-325. [doi:
    10.1192/bjp.bp.106.025023](https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.106.025023)

[^156]: Bressan, S., Gallo, E., Tirelli, F., Gregori, D. and Da Dalt, L.
    (2020) Lockdown: more domestic accidents than COVID-19 in children.
    *Arch Dis Child. [doi:
    10.1136/archdischild-2020-319547](http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2020-319547)*

[^157]: Bhopal, S., Buckland, A., McCone, R., Villis, AI., Owens, S.
    (2020) Who has been missed? Dramatic decrease in numbers of children
    seen for child protection assessments during the pandemic. *Arch Dis
    Child. [doi:
    10.1136/archdischild-2020-319783](http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2020-319783)*

[^158]: YoungMinds (2020). *Coronavirus: Impact on young people with
    mental health needs*. Further information available at:
    <https://youngminds.org.uk/about-us/reports/coronavirus-impact-on-young-people-with-mental-health-needs/>

[^159]: NSPCC Learning (2020). *What children are saying to Childline
    about coronavirus*. Available at:
    <https://learning.nspcc.org.uk/research-resources/2020/childline-briefing-coronavirus>

[^160]: [Munkhaugen](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1750946717300739#!),
    EK.,
    [Gjevik](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1750946717300739#!),
    E.,
    [HugoPripp](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1750946717300739#!),
    A.,
    [Sponheim](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1750946717300739#!),
    E.,
    [Diseth](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1750946717300739#!),
    TH. (2017). School refusal behaviour: Are children and adolescents
    with autism spectrum disorder at a higher risk? *[Research in Autism
    Spectrum
    Disorders](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/17509467).*
    [*41–42*](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/17509467/41/supp/C),
    31-38. [doi:
    10.1016/j.rasd.2017.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rasd.2017.07.001)

[^161]: [Ochi](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Ochi+M&cauthor_id=32419839),
    M.,
    [Kawabe](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Kawabe+K&cauthor_id=32419839),
    K.,
    [Och](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Ochi+S&cauthor_id=32419839)i,
    S.,
    [Miyama](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Miyama+T&cauthor_id=32419839),
    T.,[Horiuchi](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Horiuchi+F&cauthor_id=32419839),
    F. and
    [Ueno](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Ueno+SI&cauthor_id=32419839),
    SI. (2020). School Refusal and Bullying in Children with Autism
    Spectrum Disorder. *Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Mental Health.
    14:17*.
    doi: [10.1186/s13034-020-00325-7](https://dx.doi.org/10.1186%2Fs13034-020-00325-7)

[^162]: Crawley, E., Loades, M., Feder, G., Logan, S., Redwood, S. and
    Macleod, J. (2020) Wider collateral damage to children in the UK
    because of the social distancing measures designed to reduce the
    impact of COVID-19 in adults. BMJ Paediatrics Open, 4(1).
    doi: [10.1136/bmjpo-2020-000701](https://dx.doi.org/10.1136%2Fbmjpo-2020-000701)

[^163]: Department of Social and Health Care (2020) *What the Coronvirus
    bill will do*. Available at:
    <https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-bill-what-it-will-do/what-the-coronavirus-bill-will-do>

[^164]: YoungMinds (2020). *Coronavirus: Impact on young people with
    mental health needs*. Further information available at:
    <https://youngminds.org.uk/about-us/reports/coronavirus-impact-on-young-people-with-mental-health-needs/>

[^165]: Power, M., Doherty, B., Pybus, K. and Pickett, K. (2020) How
    COVID-19 has exposed inequalities in the UK food system: The case of
    UK food and poverty. *Emerald Open Res* 2020, 2:11 [doi:
    10.35241/emeraldopenres.13539.2](https://doi.org/10.35241/emeraldopenres.13539.2)

[^166]: The Food Foundation (2020) Vulnerability to food insecurity
    since the COVID-19 lockdown. Available at:
    <https://foodfoundation.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Report_COVID19FoodInsecurity-final.pdf> 

[^167]: Economists have done numerous analyses for the [Economics
    Observatory](https://www.coronavirusandtheeconomy.com/) and for [VOX
    EU / CEPR](https://voxeu.org/pages/covid-19-page) on these and
    related labour market issues arising from the pandemic. See also
    analysis of these issues from [The Institute for Fiscal
    Studies](https://www.ifs.org.uk/coronavirus).

[^168]: Costa Dias, M., Farquharson, C., Griffith, R., Joyce, R. and
    Levell, P. (2020) Getting people back into work: IFS Briefing Note
    BN286. Available at:
    <https://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/BN286-Getting-people-back-into-work-1.pdf>

[^169]: Economics Observatory (2020) Who can work from home and how does
    it affect their productivity? Available at:

    <https://www.coronavirusandtheeconomy.com/question/who-can-work-home-and-how-does-it-affect-their-productivity>

[^170]: Economics Observatory (2020) How will the response to
    coronavirus affect gender equality? Available at: [<span
    class="underline">https://www.coronavirusandtheeconomy.com/question/how-will-response-coronavirus-affect-gender-equality</span>](https://www.coronavirusandtheeconomy.com/question/how-will-response-coronavirus-affect-gender-equality)

[^171]: Joyce, R. and Xu, X. (2020) Sector shutdowns during the
    coronavirus crisis: which workers are most exposed? IFS Briefing
    Note BN278. Available at:
    <https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/14791>

[^172]: Alon, T., Doepke, M., Olmstead-Rumsey, J. and Tertilt, M. (2020)
    The Impact of Covid-19 on Gender Equality. NBER WP 26947. [<span
    class="underline">https://www.nber.org/papers/w26947.pdf</span>](https://www.nber.org/papers/w26947.pdf)

[^173]: Economics Observatory (2020) How will the response to
    coronavirus affect gender equality? Available at:
    <https://www.coronavirusandtheeconomy.com/question/how-will-response-coronavirus-affect-gender-equality>

[^174]: Sevilla, A. and Smith, S. (2020) Childcare during a global
    pandemic: Many women left juggling work and childcare, but men do
    their share when they are not working. VoxEU CEPR, 16 June 2020.
    Available at:

    [https://voxeu.org/article/COVID-19-and-childcare-men-doing-their-share-only-if-they-are-not-working](https://voxeu.org/article/covid-19-and-childcare-men-doing-their-share-only-if-they-are-not-working)

[^175]: Understanding Society (2020) Covid-19 survey briefing note.
    Available at:
    <https://www.understandingsociety.ac.uk/sites/default/files/downloads/general/ukhls_briefingnote_COVID_health_final.pdf>

[^176]: Costa Dias, M., Farquharson, C., Griffith, R., Joyce, R. and
    Levell, P. (2020) Getting people back into work: IFS Briefing Note
    BN286. Available at: <https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/14829>

[^177]: Platt, L. and Warwick, R. (2020) COVID‐19 and Ethnic
    Inequalities in England and Wales. *Fiscal Studies*. [doi:
    10.1111/1475-5890.12228](https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-5890.12228)

[^178]: Economics Observatory (2020) How is coronavirus affecting
    inequalities across ethnic groups? Available at
    <https://www.coronavirusandtheeconomy.com/question/how-crisis-affecting-inequalities-across-ethnic-groups>

[^179]: Platt, L. and Warwick, R. (2020) COVID‐19 and Ethnic
    Inequalities in England and Wales. *Fiscal Studies*. [doi:
    10.1111/1475-5890.12228](https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-5890.12228)

[^180]: Holmes, E.A., O'Connor, R.C., Perry, V.H., Tracey, I., Wessely,
    S., Arseneault, L., Ballard, C., Christensen, H., Silver, R.C.,
    Everall, I. and Ford, T. (2020) Multidisciplinary research
    priorities for the COVID-19 pandemic: a call for action for mental
    health science. *The Lancet Psychiatry*. [doi:
    10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30168-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30168-1)

[^181]: Pierce, M., McManus, S., Jessop, C., John, A., Hotopf, M., Ford,
    T., Hatch, S., Wessely, S., Abel, K. (2020). A critical look at
    mental health surveys during COVID-19. *The Lancet Psychiatry. [doi:
    10.17863/CAM.54251](https://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.54251)*

[^182]: Understanding Society (2020) Covid-19 Survey Briefing Note –
    home schooling. Available at:
    <https://www.understandingsociety.ac.uk/sites/default/files/downloads/general/ukhls_briefingnote_COVID_homeschool_final.pdf>

[^183]: Kwong, A.S.F., Pearson, R.M., Adams, M.J., Northstone, K.,
    Tilling, K., Smith, D., Fawns-Ritchie, C., Bould, H., Warne, N.,
    Zammit, S. and Gunnell, D.J. (2020) Mental health during the
    COVID-19 pandemic in two longitudinal UK population cohorts.
    *medRxiv*. [doi:
    10.1101/2020.06.16.20133116](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.16.20133116)

[^184]: Pierce, M., Hope, H., Ford, T., Hatch, S., Hotopf, M.,
    Kontopantelis, E., John, A., Webb, R.T., Wessely, S., McManus, S.
    and Abel, K.M. (2020) Mental Health Before and During the COVID-19
    Pandemic: A Longitudinal Probability Sample Survey of the UK
    Population. SSRN 3624264. [doi:
    10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30308-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30308-4)

[^185]: UK Government (2020) *Education plans from September
    2020* Available at
    <https://www.gov.uk/guidance/education-plans-from-september-2020>
    \[Accessed 9 July 2020\].
