---
title: Scoping Report on Hospital and Health Care Acquisition of COVID-19 and its
  Control
date: 2020-07-06 00:00:00 Z
report_number: 3
layout: report
abstract: |-
  -   The focus of this report is on SARS-CoV-2 infection acquired in hospital. It is timed to inform decisions about the opening up of hospitals and other healthcare settings for non-COVID-19 activities and NHS plans for winter and future waves of COVID-19.
  -   Transmission of COVID-19 in hospitals and social care settings in patients, residents and staff has been recognised as an important feature of the COVID-19 epidemic throughout the world; efforts to prevent infections have had varying success. Transmissions early in the epidemic reflected evolving understanding of the disease (e.g., the risk of asymptomatic infection and role of masks in source control) and limited access to testing and personal protective equipment.
  -   Infections in hospital have important implications for infection outcomes (hospitalised patients and some staff are at higher risk), workforce planning (healthcare workers being unable to work during peak pressure periods), and amplification of community transmission (through discharge of infectious patients and transmission to families and other contacts from healthcare workers and patients).
  -   Using publicly available data, we estimate that at least 10% (95% confidence interval: 4-15%) of all COVID-19 infections in England were among patient-facing healthcare workers and resident-facing social care workers during the period from 26<sup>th</sup> April to 7<sup>th</sup> June 2020. An estimated further 1% of infections in this period were acquired by inpatients in hospital, with an additional 6% of all infections among care home residents. This does not consider secondary cases arising from hospital acquired infections elsewhere.
  -   Although surveillance systems and large-scale hospital-based studies have recently been set up, there remain gaps in availability of surveillance data on hospital-acquired infections, particularly of healthcare workers (including agency staff) and in nursing homes; important questions remain unanswered, including about the impact on Black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) health and social care workers.
  -   At present, there is no single organisation with clear oversight of hospital-related infection surveillance, monitoring and response. Data obtained from surveillance, monitoring and outbreak investigations need to feed into epidemiological and modelling research, including to evaluate interventions. There remain significant opportunities to link epidemiological and phylogenetic datasets to improve the ability to identify and respond to changing epidemic dynamics.
  -   In recent weeks, there have been significant improvements reported in data collection and prevention of hospital acquired infection, but the data are not yet publicly available to assess the impact of changes and these are urgently needed.
  -   The report considers what further actions are needed to build comprehensive surveillance and infection control systems, with awareness that this would require further resources and expert support to the hospital, public health and care sectors. It sets out a suggested framework for effective centralised surveillance and monitoring of hospital acquired infections, linked to rapid infection control responses with sharing of best practice, coordinated through local teams. In the medium-term, we envisage an ambitious and comprehensive approach to prevention of infection transmitted through respiratory droplets and aerosol routes in hospitals, of the breadth and scale successfully implemented for methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (MRSA).
---

*This paper has drawn on evidence available up to 28 June 2020. Further
evidence on this topic is constantly published and DELVE may return to
this topic in the future. This independent overview of the science has
been provided in good faith by subject experts. DELVE and the Royal
Society accept no legal liability for decisions made based on this
evidence.*



### Table of Contents

1. [Problem statement](#1-problem-statement)
2. [Background](#2-background)
3. [Current sources and gaps in understanding of hospital-related COVID-19 transmission](#3-current-sources-and-gaps-in-understanding-of-hospital-related-covid-19-transmission)
4. [Epidemiological evidence of hospital acquired transmission5](#4-epidemiological-evidence-of-hospital-acquired-transmission)
5. [Successful infection control practices for COVID-19](#5-successful-infection-control-practices-for-covid-19)
6. [Summary considerations](#6-summary-considerations)

* [Technical Appendices](#technical-appendices){% assign addenda = site.addenda | sort: 'title' %}{% for addendum in addenda  %}{% if addendum.report == 'NOS' %}
  * [{{ addendum.title }}]({%if addendum.pdfonly %}{{ addendum.pdf }}{% else %}{{ addendum.url }}{%endif%}){% endif %}{% endfor %}
* [Footnotes and References](#footnotes-and-references)

# 1. Problem statement

Despite recent declines in COVID-19 cases there remains a significant
risk of future epidemic waves, which may overlap with other pressures on
the NHS and care system (particularly influenza, but also other
infections) over the winter. There is an urgent need to safely open up
hospitals to provide non-COVID-19 inpatient and outpatient care. There
has been substantial heterogeneity in hospital acquired infection rates,
in trust-level infection control responses and in policies across the
devolved national administrations. Systematic data collection over the
course of the epidemic thus far has been insufficient to identify the
extent, sources and risks for hospital acquired transmission and to
allow effective targeted outbreak response and infection control.
Substantial recent investments have, however, been made to improve
surveillance and control, but comprehensive, accessible national data
are currently limited. For example, the absolute number of healthcare
workers affected is unknown, as is the time and place of acquisition of
infection. This lack of information is of particular importance in the
case of Black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) healthcare workers amid
widespread concerns that their mortality from COVID-19 exceeds their
representation in the work force. Similarly, there has been only limited
exploration of the extent to which hospital acquired transmission
amplifies wider community spread, including to and from institutional
settings such as care homes, especially when there was a lack of testing
capacity within the NHS and social care.

This report provides an outline of the considerations in building a
robust surveillance and response system to prevent future hospital
acquired COVID-19 outbreaks. It will:

1.  consider key areas to address in the hospital response;

2.  highlight evidence gaps in understanding hospital-related
    transmission;

3.  identify broad areas for systematic interventions.

# 2. Background

Hospitals are high-risk sites for COVID-19 transmission because:

1.  physical distancing is not always possible, leading to unavoidable
    close contacts between healthcare workers and patients, and contact
    between health workers on wards, non-patient and rest areas;

2.  they can be sites of inadvertent mixing of COVID-19-infected and
    uninfected patients, for example, due to asymptomatic cases that are
    unrecognised as infectious;

3.  many hospitalised patients and some staff are more vulnerable to
    COVID-19 infection and its complications – due to higher prevalence
    of both comorbid conditions and other risk factors (e.g.,
    socioeconomic status, ethnicity);

4.  healthcare workers and patients may transmit the infection into the
    community, including to their families, contacts and to highly
    vulnerable populations in care homes.

Prevention of hospital-acquired infections – among both staff and
patients – could substantially impact epidemic transmission and help
limit resurgence. Healthcare worker infections are important both
because of the impact on their personal health, the risk of transmission
to patients, and because they lead to loss of key healthcare providers
for prolonged periods, both when infected and when required to
quarantine, often at the time of maximum strain on the workforce.
Hospital-acquired patient infections pose a greater clinical concern
than community-acquired ones because complication rates for those
hospitalised for other reasons are higher than in the wider population.
Since hospitals connect a wide range of households and institutions
within their communities, hospital-acquired infections can seed
infections in care homes and other residential institutions, their
surrounding communities and within the hospital itself (see Figure 1).

The primary focus of this report will be on transmission occurring
within the hospital setting (acknowledging that identifying such
transmissions has challenges). We recognise that these transmissions can
have wider impact, due to the movement of individuals between hospitals
and care homes, shared staff housing and other community settings. While
we will not cover policies for these extra-hospital movements (and
related infections) in detail, we will consider hospital practices that
might amplify wider community transmission.

Despite the absence of systematic data on hospital-acquired infections,
there is little doubt that they have been substantial. A recent
modelling study estimated that 20% of inpatient infections, and up to
89% of healthcare worker infections, were hospital acquired.[^1] In a
major London teaching hospital, 15% of inpatients with COVID-19 from
2<sup>nd</sup> March to 12<sup>th</sup> April 2020 had a
hospital-acquired infection, with a case fatality rate of 36%.[^2] The
Dynamic COVID-19 Clinical Information Network (CO-CIN) report to SAGE
and NERVTAG, which captures data on those testing positive within
healthcare settings, estimated that at the end of March, 10% of
inpatients with COVID-19 had acquired their infection in hospital.[^3]

Comprehensive data on the scale of healthcare worker infections are
limited. However, healthcare worker COVID-19 prevalence was estimated to
be nearly six times higher than in the general population in England
based on PCR testing (1.87% (1.07%-3.02%) tested positive compared to
0.32% (0.25%-0.44%) in the general population).[^4] In one London
hospital, over a one-month period during the peak of the epidemic in
March and April 2020, 45% of tested clinical staff were
antibody-positive and 21% nucleic acid test positive at some point; most
had no symptoms \[5\]. Such asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic
healthcare workers are particularly concerning because both groups may
pose an unrecognised transmission risk to others in the hospital and in
the community. Two surveys in UK hospitals have found 57% (17/30, 95%CI:
37-75%) and 81% (34/42, 95%CI: 66-91%) of PCR-positive workers to have
few or no symptoms.[^5] [^6] Mildly symptomatic healthcare workers may
continue working for the first few days of illness; at one Seattle
hospital 61% of infected healthcare workers with mild symptoms continued
to work.[^7] Limiting infection control precautions to those with
identified compatible symptoms will therefore be insufficient.

Using publicly available data, we estimate that at least 10% (95% CI:
4-15%) of all COVID-19 infections in England between 26<sup>th</sup>
April and 7<sup>th</sup> June were among patient-facing healthcare
workers and resident-facing social care workers (Annex 1). However, we
emphasise that we cannot determine from the ONS data source the
proportion of infections that were occupationally acquired. During the
same period, we estimate that at least 1% of all COVID-19 infections
were inpatients who acquired their infection in hospital, and that 6%
(95% CI: 4-8%) of all COVID-19 infections were care home residents. The
wide range of confidence intervals presented partly reflect the limited
publicly available data. All our calculations are based on plausible,
conservative estimates. They do not consider the unknown fraction of
secondary cases arising from healthcare-acquired infections or the
associated mortality, which has been concentrated in hospital and care
home cases (Figure 2).

Hospital outbreaks (two or more linked infections) remain ongoing even
as the number of cases is dropping nationwide; 31 were reported in
England between June 1<sup>st</sup> and 7<sup>th</sup> and 21 in the
following week.[^8] [^9] Data from CO-CIN highlight that the absolute
number of patients with definite hospital-acquired infection (symptoms
arose ≥14 days after admission) began to rise from mid-March, peaking
around 1<sup>st</sup> April. However, the proportion of all patients
with COVID-19 who had hospital-acquired infection did not peak until
1<sup>st</sup> May (Figure 3). Large clusters of infections have been
publicly reported in three acute care hospitals (Addenbrookes, Western
General, Weston General); the Addenbrookes outbreak involved multiple
clusters of infection, including both patients and healthcare workers,
although the mechanisms and directions of transmissions are not yet well
understood.[^10] This combination of larger and smaller outbreaks
highlights the heterogeneity in COVID-19 hospital-acquired infections
and may reflect differences in infection prevention and control measures
implemented by trusts. However, it is clear that most hospital-acquired
COVID-19, both of patients and healthcare workers, can be prevented if
optimal infection prevention and control practices are followed, as
exemplified by both international and domestic experiences, even in the
more difficult to control care home setting.[^11] [^12] [^13] [^14]
[^15] [^16] [^17]


<img src="/diagrams/nos/image1.png" style="width:100%" />

*Figure 1.* Schematic of the flow of individuals and possible routes of
infection in and around hospital settings


<img src="/diagrams/nos/image2.png" style="width:100%" />

*Figure 2.* Weekly mortality in England and Wales by place of occurrence

Source: Adapted from *Deaths registered weekly in England and Wales,
provisional*.[^18]


<img src="/diagrams/nos/image3.png"  style="width:100%" />  
Source: *Dynamic CO-CIN report to SAGE and NERVTAG, 21 May 2020*[^19]

*Figure 3.* Number and proportion of patients with COVID-19 with symptom
onset after hospital admission


# 3. Current sources and gaps in understanding of hospital-related COVID-19 transmission 

In order to address and minimise the risks of hospital transmission,
there is a need for better evidence on how it arises (key transmission
routes), who it affects (time, person and place), and how it is
propagated onwards (transmission mechanism). We recognise that important
steps have been taken during the epidemic to date and the challenges of
updating systems in the midst of a pandemic. Initial problems with PPE
supply and limited test availability, which restricted PCR testing for
staff, have been resolved. Steps have included a review of approaches to
understanding how COVID-19 spreads in hospitals early in the
epidemic.[^20] Recommendations for changes to environmental procedures
in hospitals were made to the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies
(SAGE) in mid-May,[^21] masks in healthcare settings were mandated from
15 June 2020,[^22] and a recent letter to all Trusts from NHS England
highlighted best practice for infection reporting, and outbreak
management.[^23] A great deal of information on COVID-19 in hospitals
has also been collected, including several nationwide efforts. These
include:

1.  *COVID-19 Clinical Information Network (CO-CIN)*.[^24] This network
    captures around half of all hospitalisations with COVID-19, adding
    hand-collected demographics and hospital episode data to positive
    COVID-19 test results. This is resource intensive and misses some
    cases but generates a rich dataset. CO-CIN has been reporting to
    SAGE regularly since 1<sup>st</sup> April.[^25]

2.  *SIREN study*. Public Health England (PHE) is conducting a study to
    evaluate the level of antibodies in 100,000 healthcare workers and
    determine the level of protective immunity past infection may offer
    (Susan Hopkins, personal communication). While longitudinal in
    design, SIREN uses a convenience sample and thus will be subject to
    selection bias.

3.  *NHS Situation Reports*. Since late May, the NHS has been compiling
    a weekly national SitRep on the COVID-19 situation; these are not
    currently publicly available.

4.  *PHE dashboard*. PHE is developing a dashboard that links several
    routine datasets to estimate the number and proportion of hospital
    acquired COVID-19 infections at NHS Trust level (Susan Hopkins,
    personal communication). These datasets include Pillar 1 COVID-19
    laboratory test results (Second Generation Surveillance System
    (SGSS)), hospital episodes statistics (HES) and Emergency Care
    discharge summaries. This project uses existing routinely available
    datasets. However, data processing and identification of
    hospital-acquired cases requires careful assumptions and there are
    points where information can be lost. The dashboard does not include
    detailed epidemiological data and is unable to capture healthcare
    worker infections.

5.  *Office for National Statistics (ONS) survey*.[^26] The ONS has been
    conducting regular population-based surveys since late May,
    including capturing information on whether participants are
    healthcare workers. Non-response for these surveys is substantial
    (over 60% for the pilot study), which may lead to bias even after
    weighting procedures, and information on hospital acquisition is not
    available. However, this dataset provides regular, well-powered
    evidence on trends in prevalence.

6.  *COVID Symptom Study smartphone application*. Developed by a private
    company (ZOE) and researchers at Kings College London, this app
    allows users to track their symptoms and pool information for
    analysis. While this produces a non-random sample of participants,
    data from this study has been used to estimate that healthcare
    workers in the UK and US had over 11 times the hazard of having
    tested positive for COVID-19, and 3.4 time the hazard after
    adjusting for likelihood of having tested.[^27]

7.  *COVID-19 in care homes (VIVALDI) study*.[^28] This cohort study
    aims to observe what proportion of 11,500 care home staff and
    residents have been previously infected with SARS-CoV-2 at baseline,
    and through serial antibody and PCR testing and data linkage with
    NHS and other sources, estimate how many become infected and the
    duration of the antibody response. Initial high-level results were
    published on 3<sup>rd</sup> July.[^29]

While these various sources provide substantial data, each of them has
limitations, and triangulation between them has not been systematically
conducted to date. Moreover, data from these systems are not normally
publicly available, although some (e.g., ONS, CO-CIN) are available on
request through a governed process. As a result, there are a number of
key information gaps that limit our ability to understand and tackle
hospital acquired infections:

1.  *Patient infections*. While the identities (and thus
    socio-demographics and comorbidities) of individuals testing
    positive are often captured, the time and place of onset (and thus
    possible transmission source) is not documented in a consistent or
    coordinated manner. This information, in conjunction with systematic
    surveillance data from residential care settings (which is currently
    also lacking) can help determine where improved infection prevention
    and control measures are required. A short standardised reporting
    system for each positive result (similar to systems previously used
    for methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* and
    *Clostridioides difficile*) could help with this along with
    root-cause analysis, as recently requested by NHS England;[^30]
    Trust-level reporting of probable and definite healthcare-associated
    COVID-19 infections, is required since COVID-19 is a notifiable
    disease; however these data are not yet publicly available.

2.  *Healthcare worker infections*. Although SIREN, a large-scale
    healthcare worker survey to measure prevalence and incidence has
    been established recently, data on healthcare worker acquisition
    have been substantially more limited than on patients. Comprehensive
    information will be needed including time of onset, time and place
    (hospital setting, other institution, home) of possible acquisition,
    relevant exposures, role/occupation, risk factors, comorbidities and
    socio-demographics. *Addressing c*oncerns about excess morbidity and
    mortality in BAME healthcare workers requires data such as these.
    While testing of healthcare worker and social care staff is being
    conducted, alongside widespread PCR and antibody testing (Pillars
    1,2 and 4[^31]), comprehensive data sampling frames, analyses and
    results are not currently available.

3.  *Population-level staffing*. Agency and other mobile staff may have
    been implicated in several institutional COVID-19 outbreaks,
    however, very little is known about how outbreaks relate to staff
    absences and the use of temporary staff (which itself may facilitate
    transmission between healthcare settings). Comprehensive data on
    staff sickness and other absences, and temporary staff arrival and
    mobility, would allow identification of patterns predictive of
    outbreak risk and targeted prevention interventions, and enable
    better workplace planning.

4.  *Hospital outbreak investigations*. Effective interventions to stop
    transmission within hospitals require systematic investigations
    directly linked to recommendations for infection prevention and
    control changes. Such investigations are the responsibility of Trust
    Directors of Infection Prevention and Control (DIPC) and guidance
    has recently been strengthened.[^32] These changes could be
    monitored using local or regional assistance and peer learning from
    hospitals that have successfully eliminated outbreaks. While greater
    involvement of local PHE Health Protection Teams (led by consultants
    in communicable disease control (CCDC)) and Local Authority
    Directors of Public Health (DsPH) has commenced, there is no
    comprehensive national database on the nature or outcomes of these
    investigations. Such a database would allow an evidence base to be
    built, from which learning and interventions can be optimised.

5.  *Data linkage*. Effective interpretation and use of all the above
    information rely on joined-up data. This includes linkages
    between: i) hospitals and their local community, including related
    care institutions; and ii) epidemiological and phylogenetic data to
    understand the characteristics of individuals with linked infections
    and make valid inferences about likely transmission events.

6.  *Systematic PHE involvement.* The current situation, where PHE and
    local public health specialists can only investigate hospital
    acquired outbreaks when invited to do so by the local hospital trust
    is not conducive to full understanding of the national situation.

In establishing the Joint Biosecurity Centre (JBC), several of these
gaps may be addressed by bringing together new and existing initiatives,
including Test and Trace and outbreak investigations, into a
comprehensive, centralised surveillance system capturing all infections
acquired by patients and healthcare workers and any onward transmission.
Data collected in the areas listed above will be synergistic in
providing benefits. The availability of the above data will enable key
questions to be answered, either directly or via modelling based on
these parameters as inputs. Key questions include, but are not limited
to:

1.  Does patient acquisition/outcome differ by occupation, clinical
    setting, ethnicity and social deprivation?

2.  What are the relative contributions of transmission pathways
    (patient to patient, patient to staff, staff to staff, etc (see
    Figure 1))?

3.  What are the relative contributions of transmission locations
    (wards, theatres, bathrooms, shared staff spaces) and modes (direct
    droplet, aerosol, fomites)?

4.  How does staff movement between hospital wards in the same hospital,
    or between hospitals, outpatient clinics and care homes amplify
    disease spread?

5.  What is the national, regional and local fraction of healthcare
    worker infection that can be attributed to transmission at work
    (from patients or other healthcare workers), as opposed to
    community-acquisition, and does this fraction change with levels of
    infection in the community or other risk factors (e.g., ethnicity)?

6.  What fraction of community-acquired cases are likely seeded
    from: (1) healthcare workers; (2) patients discharged to care
    facilities; (3) patients discharged home?

7.  Where do hospital interventions need to be focused to minimise the
    risk of outbreaks?

8.  What specific interventions work to bring hospital acquired
    outbreaks under control?

9.  How well are hospitals able to implement recommendations and what
    additional support do they need to achieve them?

10. Are there differences in how the devolved nations of the UK and
    other countries have experienced and responded to hospital
    transmission that would inform future policy?

Determining the answers to these questions will require a clear mandate
and resources. It will be challenging because of the need to distinguish
between the potential explanations for apparent transmission chains
linked to hospitals. The route of transmission for healthcare workers
and patients can be difficult to ascertain with certainty because of the
variable incubation period and clinical course of the disease, and
because it is difficult to discriminate between exposure to hospital and
community environments as the source, making it difficult to ascertain
transmission dynamics. Molecular strain typing may be useful to help
answer these (noting important caveats about inferring transmission and
its direction), but its utility is predicated on timely linkage to
epidemiology data (time, person, place), which is not currently widely
available. It is likely that some of these questions, and data
collection and modelling for them, will need to be prioritised, but the
ordering of such priorities is likely to shift as the epidemic
progresses.

# 4. Epidemiological evidence of hospital acquired transmission

Internationally, hospital-acquired COVID-19 has been linked to a number
of inadequate infection prevention and control practices:

-   Failure to use personal protective equipment (PPE) appropriate for
    personal encounters, such as face masks, eye protection, gowns and
    gloves, either because of the lack of availability of appropriate
    equipment or lack of recognition of an infected patient or
    healthcare worker;

-   Inadequate hand washing and respiratory hygiene;

-   Failure to properly disinfect surfaces and maintain overall
    environmental hygiene and ventilation;

-   Failure to eliminate the potential for fomites to transmit infection
    within or carry infection into or out of hospitals;

-   Lack of escalation of infection prevention and control practices
    during patient encounters involving aerosol generation or exposure
    to mucosal surfaces and fluids;

-   Lack of appropriate physical distancing;

-   Failure to separate infected from non-infected patients;

-   Rotation of staff between infected and uninfected patient locations
    or between hospitals;

-   Inadequate testing and tracing capacity.

Much of the evidence for these modes of transmission is inferred from
reports of hospital acquired transmission and one well-documented
transmission in a care home earlier in the pandemic.

-   Nine separate clusters of infection involving 35 healthcare workers
    and family members were reported from one Wuhan hospital when
    COVID-19 infections were occurring but unrecognised; they were
    attributed to lack of use of PPE in the hospital and large staff
    gatherings.[^33]

-   Hospital acquired infection of 80 healthcare workers and 39 patients
    in one South African hospital was attributed to lack of the use of
    isolation and droplet and contact precautions, insufficient hand
    washing, delayed recognition of a COVID-19-infected patient,
    transferring infected patients between different wards and
    inadequate surface disinfection.[^34]

-   From neurosurgery departments in 107 hospitals in Hubei province,
    120 doctors and nurses were infected.[^35] The source of infection
    was reported to be a work colleague (38% of infections), an infected
    patient (29%), an infected family member (4%) or unknown (29%).
    Transmission was attributed to inadequate PPE and unrecognised
    contagious patients or colleagues.

-   In a Bavarian maternity centre, 36 staff members were infected.[^36]
    The initial source was found to be a midwife who had recently
    returned from a ski trip. She became ill with a respiratory illness,
    later shown to be COVID-19 with several transmission chains
    following. The midwife attended a staff meeting at the clinic on the
    day that she became ill. The transmission chain was attributed to a
    failure to recognise a case of COVID-19 infection, staff meetings
    and eating in a canteen. Social distancing in break rooms and the
    staff canteen, and universal mask use were put in place with no
    further outbreaks at the clinic.

-   A febrile healthcare worker reported to work at a paediatric
    dialysis unit in Germany, resulting in the infection of 28
    healthcare workers, 13 patients and 7 patient companions.[^37] The
    outbreak was attributed to work attendance of a symptomatic infected
    worker, lack of physical distancing and lack of use of appropriate
    PPE.

-   In the geriatric unit of a French hospital, a patient admitted with
    fever and respiratory symptoms that was not recognised to be
    COVID-19 led to 4 other patients and a healthcare worker on the same
    unit becoming infected.[^38] The outbreak was attributed to a super
    spreader event enabled by the lack of droplet and contact
    precautions, lack of universal use of enhanced infection prevention
    and control measures for all patients, and lack of timely COVID-19
    diagnosis or suspicion.

-   In a Seattle care home, a symptomatic worker introduced COVID-19
    into the facility.[^39] The nursing home began using enhanced
    infection prevention and control practices two days after the
    introduction of the infection, but before its recognition. Staff
    were screened for symptoms and symptomatic residents were cared for
    using COVID-19-appropriate PPE. However, there was a high rate of
    presymptomatic disease, allowing spread of infection to several
    facility wings. A total of 57 residents (64% of all residents) and
    26 staff (18% of all staff) were infected. Infected staff included
    nurses, as well as physical therapists, food delivery staff and
    janitorial staff, many of whom worked in multiple facility wings.
    Eleven of the infected residents were hospitalised and 15 died. The
    lack of recognition of presymptomatic spread of infection, and the
    assumption that asymptomatic persons were not contagious, was the
    main factor that was linked to spread of infection in the facility.
    Universal infection prevention and control measures regardless of
    symptoms aborted the outbreak.

-   In an acute hospital in London, a review of 435 inpatient cases of
    COVID-19 between 2<sup>nd</sup> March and 12<sup>th</sup> April 2020
    found that 66 (15%) were probably or definitely hospital
    acquired.[^40] There was evidence of patient-to-patient transmission
    between cases in the same bay, but the likely source could not be
    identified for most cases and might have been staff members, other
    patients or visitors with unrecognised infection. A comprehensive
    infection prevention and control (IPC) response was mounted, which
    included expansion of PPE use and cohorting of suspected cases; the
    number and proportion of hospital acquired cases subsequently fell.
    There was also evidence of high infection rates in healthcare
    workers in the same hospital: a cohort of 181 healthcare workers
    enrolled in late March and early April found 45% were antibody
    positive by one-month follow-up.[^41]

These reports documenting hospital acquired transmission highlight that
infection control practices that may be in place to prevent transmission
of non-respiratory pathogens like hepatitis B, methicillin-resistant
*Staphylococcus aureus (*MRSA) and enteric infections will be
insufficient to prevent SARS-CoV-2 which appears to transmit
predominantly through the respiratory droplet route.

# 5. Successful infection control practices for COVID-19

There is much publicly available guidance on specific infection
prevention and control practices. There is also evidence that hospital
acquired infection has been controlled in some cases.[^42] [^43] Guided
by our analysis of this literature, and evidence of infection prevention
and control practices used in the UK and elsewhere ([^44] [^45] [^46]
[^47] [^48] [^49] [^50] [^51] [^52] and Annex 2), we summarise the
following important measures that have been reported to reduce
hospital-acquired transmission, organised according to transmission
routes shown in Figure 1.

1.  Minimise risk of importation into hospitals

    1.  Consistent and reasonable limits on visitors (varying by local
        epidemic state)

    2.  Minimise agency/multi-site staffing and staff movements
        between sites (including hospitals, care homes and other
        institutions) as practical

    3.  Entry screening, or self-certification, of staff, patients and
        visitors for signs and symptoms of COVID-19 infection[^53]

    4.  Maximise use of telemedicine and remote consultations

2.  Minimise risk of transmission within hospitals

    1.  Aerosol/droplet transmission

        1.  Requirements to wear surgical/cloth masking by staff,
            visitors and patients wherever feasible, for source control;
            in addition to staff masking for wearer-protection in
            specific high-risk settings[^54]

        2.  Organise hospitals into COVID-19 stratified “hot” and
            “cold” zones, or entire hospitals into “hot” and “cold”
            hospitals if feasible

        3.  Cohort staff to limit physical overlap and movement
            between zones if possible, i.e., “bubbling”

        4.  Limits on communal activities for healthcare workers
            (break rooms, cafeteria) and maintenance of physical
            distancing

        5.  Move Multidisciplinary Team and other meetings online as
            much as possible

        6.  Maximise use of remote consultations for outpatients

        7.  Maintain effective airflow handling systems (acknowledging
            building infrastructure limits)

        8.  Physical distancing, especially in likely hotspots
            (e.g., waiting rooms, triage locations, A&E, corridors,
            lifts, staff lounges, canteens or cafeterias)

    2.  Contact transmission

        1.  Repeated frequent handwashing for everyone present in
            facility

        2.  Ensuring access to appropriate personal protective
            equipment for all staff

        3.  Training on donning and doffing personal protective
            equipment (e.g., masks, gowns, gloves, visors), and
            mandating staff use as appropriate

        4.  Reduced sharing of equipment (e.g., computer keyboards)

        5.  Expanded and improved environmental cleaning procedures
            (including exploring novel methods such as UV light,
            antiviral surfaces, optimum surfaces)

3.  Minimise risk of outbreak occurrence and expansion within
    hospital

    1.  Active clinical surveillance of patients for the development
        of COVID-19 infection

    2.  Prompt isolation, testing, investigation and contact tracing
        of infected healthcare workers

    3.  Prompt quarantine of healthcare workers and patients with
        significant exposure to known cases, and self-monitoring for
        those with lesser exposure

    4.  Rapid and standardised outbreak investigations and
        reporting, including root-cause analysis

    5.  Provision of sick leave without penalty or prejudice based on
        symptoms (including contract staff)

4.  Minimise risk of exportation from hospitals

    1.  Testing/quarantining of patients being discharged to own home
        or institutional care

The simultaneous use of overlapping infection control measures has made
it difficult to evaluate the importance of each measure individually.
However, multiple coordinated precautions are likely to be required,
reinforced by comprehensive staff training linked to continuous
professional development. Strong leadership is needed at a high level
across the healthcare service to ensure that these are applied and
monitored effectively and consistently to minimise hospital acquired
infection and prevent onward transmission to the community and thus
further pressures on hospitals.

# 6. Summary considerations 

To minimise and control hospital-acquired COVID-19 infections, we
recommend continuing and enhanced investment in standardised, timely,
nationwide hospital surveillance systems to track and analyse trends and
undertake rapid, locally led, outbreak control. Many of the ideas below
are being developed within the COVID-19 response by the JBC and PHE
among others; our aim is to highlight the urgent need for their
systematic and joint implementation, and transparent rapid access to
data. We envisage an ambitious and comprehensive approach to prevention
of infection transmitted through respiratory droplets and aerosols in
hospitals, of the kind successfully implemented for MRSA.[^55]

1.  *Rapid identification of COVID-19 cases within hospitals*. Establish
    a standardised risk-based protocol for testing individuals within
    hospitals, both for COVID-19 and other key respiratory pathogens
    such as influenza, including consistent intensity, breadth of
    coverage and speed of results turnaround. This protocol would need
    to reach beyond existing systems for testing patients to cover
    hospital employees (including staff without patient-facing roles),
    students and volunteers.

2.  *Centralised surveillance and monitoring of COVID-19 infections
    acquired within hospitals*. Building on existing reporting systems,
    standardised COVID-19 case reporting would allow the rapid
    identification of hospitals with certain or probable outbreaks and
    cases linked to them, with the potential for external oversight
    (e.g. the Care Quality Commission). Direct surveillance might be
    supported by using routinely available data, such as on staff
    absences which can also inform workforce planning decisions, and
    processed results such as phylogenetic data. Reports should be
    publicly available, and include case numbers and reductions over
    time, as part of hospital performance metrics.

3.  *Connected COVID-19 data systems across community, care institutions
    and hospitals*. Information on local community incidence and links
    to institutional settings, including long-term care facilities, may
    empower hospitals to assess the risk of importing and exporting
    cases, and take appropriate preventative measures.

4.  *Standardised, tiered infection prevention and control guidelines*.
    These guidelines should vary by risk level, based on closely
    monitored infection levels; much of this already exists, but
    requires integration with the other considerations in this section.

5.  *Regional or local outbreak investigations for COVID-19*. A minimum
    standard for outbreak investigations should be set centrally, with
    external oversight (e.g., the JBC, PHE) and a standardised reporting
    structure. While the preferred approach to outbreak management
    should be through empowerment of Trust or hospital-level structures
    (e.g., Directors of Infection Prevention and Control), but may
    require central resources. Outbreak investigations should include
    support from successful local/regional peer institutions, including
    PHE and Directors of Public Health. Report findings should lead to
    enforceable, externally monitored recommendations of interventions
    to reduce hospital transmission, with mandated executive-level
    responsibility for implementation. All hospital-acquired infections
    should be linked to existing Test and Trace systems.

6.  *Research platform*. Data obtained from surveillance, monitoring and
    outbreak investigations should feed into epidemiological and
    modelling research and evaluation. This research is needed to
    evaluate which interventions are cost-effective and feasible in
    preventing hospital and social care transmission in the long-term.

# Footnotes and References


[^1]: Evans, S., Agnew, E., Vynnycky, E. and Robotham, JV. (2020) The
    impact of testing and infection prevention and control strategies on
    within-hospital transmission dynamics of COVID-19 in English
    hospitals. medRxiv. doi:
    [10.1101/2020.05.12.20095562](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.05.12.20095562v2)

[^2]: Rickman HM, Rampling T, Shaw K, Martinez-Garcia G, Hail L, Coen P,
    et al. Nosocomial transmission of COVID-19: a retrospective study of
    66 hospital-acquired cases in a London teaching hospital. Clin
    Infect Dis. 2020. doi: <https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa816>

[^3]: SAGE (2020) Dynamic CO-CIN report to SAGE and NERVTAG (1 April
    2020). Available from:
    <https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/886424/s0096-co-cin-report-010420-sage22.pdf>

[^4]: Office for National Statistics (2020) Coronavirus (COVID-19)
    Infection Survey pilot: 5 June 2020: Office for National Statistics.
    Available from:
    <https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/coronaviruscovid19infectionsurveypilot/5june2020/pdf>

[^5]: Houlihan, C., Vora, N., Byrne, T., Lewer, D., Heaney, J., Moore,
    DA. et al. (2020) SARS-CoV-2 virus and antibodies in front-line
    Health Care Workers in an acute hospital in London: preliminary
    results from a longitudinal study. medRxiv. doi:
    [10.1101/2020.06.08.20120584v1](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.06.08.20120584v1)

[^6]: Rivett, L., Sridhar, S., Sparkes, D., Routledge, M., Jones, NK.,
    Forrest, S. et al. (2020) Screening of healthcare workers for
    SARS-CoV-2 highlights the role of asymptomatic carriage in COVID-19
    transmission. Elife. doi:
    [10.7554/eLife.58728](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.58728). PubMed
    PMID: 32392129

[^7]: Chow, EJ., Schwartz, NG., Tobolowsky, FA., Zacks, RLT.,
    Huntington-Frazier, M., Reddy, SC. et al. (2020) Symptom Screening
    at Illness Onset of Health Care Personnel With SARS-CoV-2 Infection
    in King County, Washington. JAMA. 2020.
    doi:[10.1001/jama.2020.6637](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2764953)

[^8]: Public Health England (2020) Weekly Coronavirus Disease 2019
    (COVID-19) Surveillance Report: Summary of COVID-19 surveillance
    systems. Week 24 2020. Available from:
    <https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/891721/Weekly_COVID19_Surveillance_Report_-_week_24.pdf>

[^9]: Public Health England (2020) Weekly Coronavirus Disease 2019
    (COVID-19) Surveillance Report: Summary of COVID-19 surveillance
    systems. Week 25 2020. Available from:
    <https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/893216/Weekly_COVID19_Surveillance_Report_w25.pdf>

[^10]: Meredith, LW., Hamilton, WL., Warne, B., Houldcroft, CJ.,
    Hosmillo, M., Jahun, A. et al. (2020) Rapid implementation of
    real-time SARS-CoV-2 sequencing to investigate healthcare-associated
    COVID-19 infections. medRxiv. doi:
    [10.1101/2020.05.08.20095687](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.05.08.20095687v1)

[^11]: Jones, NK., Rivett, L., Sparkes, D., Forrest, S., Sridhar, S.,
    Young, J. et al. (2020) Effective control of SARS-CoV-2 transmission
    between healthcare workers during a period of diminished community
    prevalence of COVID-19. eLife. doi:
    [10.7554/eLife.59391](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.59391)

[^12]: Gawande A. (2020) Amid the Coronavirus Crisis, a Regimen for
    Reëntry. The New Yorker. 2020 3/13/2020:1-15. Available at:
    <https://www.newyorker.com/science/medical-dispatch/amid-the-coronavirus-crisis-a-regimen-for-reentry>

[^13]: Gawande, A. (2020) Keeping the Coronavirus from Infecting
    Health-Care Workers: What Singapore’s and Hong Kong’s success is
    teaching us about the pandemic. The New Yorker. 2020 3/21/2020:1-7.
    Available at:
    <https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/keeping-the-coronavirus-from-infecting-health-care-workers>

[^14]: Dora, AV., Winnett, A., Jatt, LP., Davar, K., Watanabe, M., Sohn,
    L. et al. (2020) Universal and Serial Laboratory Testing for
    SARS-CoV-2 at a Long-Term Care Skilled Nursing Facility for Veterans - Los Angeles, California, 2020. MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
    Reports. doi:
    [10.15585/mmwr.mm6921e1](https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6921e1.htm?s_cid=mm6921e1_w).
    PubMed PMID: 32463809

[^15]: Wee, LE., Conceicao, EP., Sim, XYJ., Aung, MK., Tan, KY., Wong,
    HM. et al. (2020) Minimizing intra-hospital transmission of
    COVID-19: the role of social distancing. J Hosp Infect. 2020. doi:
    [10.1016/j.jhin.2020.04.016](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.jhin.2020.04.016).
    PubMed PMID: 32294511

[^16]: Cheng, VCC., Wong, S-C., Chuang, VWM., So, SYC., Chen, JHK.,
    Sridhar, S. et al. (2020) Absence of nosocomial transmission of
    coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) due to SARS-CoV-2 in the
    pre-pandemic phase in Hong Kong. Am J Infect Control. 2020. doi:
    [10.1016/j.ajic.2020.05.018](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.ajic.2020.05.018).
    PubMed PMID: 32461068

[^17]: Cheng, VCC., Wong, S-C., Chen, JHK., Yip, CCY., Chuang, VWM.,
    Tsang, OTY. et al (2020). Escalating infection control response to
    the rapidly evolving epidemiology of the coronavirus disease 2019
    (COVID-19) due to SARS-CoV-2 in Hong Kong. Infect Control Hosp
    Epidemiol. doi:
    [10.1017/ice.2020.58](https://doi.org/10.1017/ice.2020.58). PubMed
    PMID: 32131908

[^18]: Office for National Statistics (2020) Deaths registered weekly in
    England and Wales up to week ending 12 June 2020, provisional.
    Available from:
    <https://www.ons.gov.uk/file?uri=%2fpeoplepopulationandcommunity%2fbirthsdeathsandmarriages%2fdeaths%2fdatasets%2fweeklyprovisionalfiguresondeathsregisteredinenglandandwales%2f2020/publishedweek242020.xlsx>

[^19]: SAGE (2020) Dynamic CO-CIN report to SAGE and NERVTAG (21 May
    2020). Available from:
    <https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/893440/S0428_Dynamic_CO-CIN_Report_to_SAGE_and_NERVTAG__1_.pdf>

[^20]: Powis, S. (2020) Nosocomial Transmission of Coronavirus: Research
    and management. Available from:
    <https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/892032/S0091_Nosocomial_Transmission_of_Coronavirus.pdf>

[^21]: SAGE Environmental and Modelling Group (2020). Possible
    additional interventions to address hospital transmission risks of
    SARS-CoV-2 2020. Available from:
    <https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/892014/S0344_Possible_additional_interventions_to_address_hospital_transmission_risks.pdf>

[^22]: UK Government Department of Health and Social Care (2020) Face
    masks and coverings to be worn by all NHS hospital staff and
    visitors. Published 5 June. Available from:
    <https://www.gov.uk/government/news/face-masks-and-coverings-to-be-worn-by-all-nhs-hospital-staff-and-visitors>

[^23]: May, R., Powis, S., Issar, P., Philip, P. (2020) Healthcare
    associated COVID-19 infections – further action. Available from:
    <https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/wp-content/uploads/sites/52/2020/06/Healthcare-associated-COVID-19-infections--further-action-24-June-2020.pdf>

[^24]: Docherty, AB., Harrison, EM., Green, CA., Hardwick, HE., Pius,
    R., Norman, L. (2020) et al. Features of 16,749 hospitalised UK
    patients with COVID-19 using the ISARIC WHO Clinical
    Characterisation Protocol. medRxiv. doi:
    [10.1101/2020.04.23.20076042](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.23.20076042v1)

[^25]: SAGE (2020) Dynamic CO-CIN report to SAGE and NERVTAG (1 April
    2020). Available from:
    <https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/886424/s0096-co-cin-report-010420-sage22.pdf>

[^26]: Office for National Statistics (2020) Coronavirus (COVID-19)
    Infection Survey pilot: 5 June 2020: Office for National Statistics.
    Available from:
    <https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/coronaviruscovid19infectionsurveypilot/5june2020/pdf>

[^27]: Nguyen, LH., Drew, DA., Joshi, AD., Guo, C-G., Ma, W., Mehta, RS.
    et al. (2020) Risk of COVID-19 among frontline healthcare workers
    and the general community: a prospective cohort study. medRxiv. doi:
    [10.1101/2020.04.29.20084111](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.29.20084111v6)

[^28]: Shallcross L. (2020) COVID-19 in care homes (VIVALDI). ISRCTN
    Registry. Available from: <https://doi.org/10.1186/ISRCTN14447421>

[^29]: Office for National Statistics (2020) Impact of coronavirus in
    care homes in England: 26 May to 19 June 2020. Published 3 July.
    Available from:
    <https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/articles/impactofcoronavirusincarehomesinenglandvivaldi/26mayto19june2020>

[^30]: May, R., Powis, S., Issar, P., Philip, P. (2020) Healthcare
    associated COVID-19 infections – further action. Available from:
    <https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/wp-content/uploads/sites/52/2020/06/Healthcare-associated-COVID-19-infections--further-action-24-June-2020.pdf>

[^31]: There are five pillars to COVID-19 testing in England; these are:
    (1) NHS swab testing for medical need and, where possible, the most
    critical key workers; (2) Mass-swab testing for critical key
    workers; (3) Mass-antibody testing for immunity; (4) Population
    surveillance testing; (5) Scaling up national diagnostics .

[^32]: May, R., Powis, S., Issar, P., Philip, P. (2020) Healthcare
    associated COVID-19 infections – further action. Available from:
    <https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/wp-content/uploads/sites/52/2020/06/Healthcare-associated-COVID-19-infections--further-action-24-June-2020.pdf>

[^33]: Wang, X., Zhou, Q., He, Y., Liu, L., Ma, X., Wei, X. et al.
    (2020) Nosocomial outbreak of COVID-19 pneumonia in Wuhan, China.
    Eur Respir J. doi:
    [10.1183/13993003.00544-2020](https://erj.ersjournals.com/content/55/6/2000544).
    PubMed PMID: 32366488

[^34]: Lessells, R., Moosa, Y., de Oliveira, T. (2020) Report into a
    nosocomial outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) at
    Netcare St. Augustine’s Hospital. Durban, South Africa: 2020
    5/15/2020. Available at: <https://www.krisp.org.za/news.php?id=421>

[^35]: Wang, Q., Huang, X., Bai, Y., Wang, X., Wang, H., Hu, X. et al.
    (2020) Epidemiological characteristics of COVID-19 in medical staff
    members of neurosurgery departments in Hubei province: A multicentre
    descriptive study. medRxiv. doi:
    [10.1101/2020.04.20.20064899](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.20.20064899v1)

[^36]: Kabesch, M., Roth, S., Brandstetter, S., Hausler, S., Juraschko,
    E., Weigl, M. et al. (2020) Successful containment of COVID-19
    outbreak in a large maternity and perinatal center while continuing
    clinical service. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2020. doi:
    [10.1111/pai.13265](https://doi.org/10.1111/pai.13265). PubMed PMID:
    32319131

[^37]: Schwierzeck, V., Konig, JC., Kuhn, J., Mellmann, A.,
    Correa-Martinez, CL., Omran, H. et al. (2020) First reported
    nosocomial outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
    2 (SARS-CoV-2) in a pediatric dialysis unit. Clin Infect Dis. 2020.
    doi: [10.1093/cid/ciaa491](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa491).
    PubMed PMID: 32337584

[^38]: Vanhems, P., Saadatian-Elahi, M., Chuzeville, M., Marion, E.,
    Favrelle, L., Hilliquin, D. et al. (2020) Rapid nosocomial spread of
    SARS-CoV-2 in a French geriatric unit. Infect Control Hosp
    Epidemiol. 41(7):866-7. Epub 2020/03/30. doi:
    [10.1017/ice.2020.99](https://dx.doi.org/10.1017%2Fice.2020.99)

[^39]: Arons, MM., Hatfield, KM., Reddy, SC., Kimball, A., James, A.,
    Jacobs, JR. et al. (2020) Presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 Infections and
    Transmission in a Skilled Nursing Facility. N Engl J Med. 2020. doi:
    [10.1056/NEJMoa2008457](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa2008457)

[^40]: Rickman HM, Rampling T, Shaw K, Martinez-Garcia G, Hail L, Coen
    P, et al. Nosocomial transmission of COVID-19: a retrospective study
    of 66 hospital-acquired cases in a London teaching hospital. Clin
    Infect Dis. 2020. doi: <https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa816>

[^41]: Houlihan, C., Vora, N., Byrne, T., Lewer, D., Heaney, J., Moore,
    DA. et al. (2020) SARS-CoV-2 virus and antibodies in front-line
    Health Care Workers in an acute hospital in London: preliminary
    results from a longitudinal study. medRxiv. doi:
    [10.1101/2020.06.08.20120584v1](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.06.08.20120584v1)

[^42]: Wu, Z. and McGoogan, JM. (2020) Characteristics of and important
    lessons from the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in
    China: summary of a report of 72 314 cases from the Chinese Center
    for Disease Control and Prevention. JAMA. 2020;323(13):1239-42

[^43]: World Health Organization (2020) Report of the WHO-China joint
    mission on coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Geneva: WHO, 2020.
    Available from:
    <https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-final-report.pdf>

[^44]: Rivett, L., Sridhar, S., Sparkes, D., Routledge, M., Jones, NK.,
    Forrest, S. et al. (2020) Screening of healthcare workers for
    SARS-CoV-2 highlights the role of asymptomatic carriage in COVID-19
    transmission. Elife. doi:
    [10.7554/eLife.58728](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.58728). PubMed
    PMID: 32392129

[^45]: Gawande A. (2020) Amid the Coronavirus Crisis, a Regimen for
    Reëntry. The New Yorker. 2020 3/13/2020:1-15. Available at:
    <https://www.newyorker.com/science/medical-dispatch/amid-the-coronavirus-crisis-a-regimen-for-reentry>

[^46]: Gawande, A. (2020) Keeping the Coronavirus from Infecting
    Health-Care Workers: What Singapore’s and Hong Kong’s success is
    teaching us about the pandemic. The New Yorker. 2020 3/21/2020:1-7.
    Available at:
    <https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/keeping-the-coronavirus-from-infecting-health-care-workers>

[^47]: Kabesch, M., Roth, S., Brandstetter, S., Hausler, S., Juraschko,
    E., Weigl, M. et al. (2020) Successful containment of COVID-19
    outbreak in a large maternity and perinatal center while continuing
    clinical service. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2020. doi:
    [10.1111/pai.13265](https://doi.org/10.1111/pai.13265). PubMed PMID:
    32319131

[^48]: Schwierzeck, V., Konig, JC., Kuhn, J., Mellmann, A.,
    Correa-Martinez, CL., Omran, H. et al. (2020) First reported
    nosocomial outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
    2 (SARS-CoV-2) in a pediatric dialysis unit. Clin Infect Dis. 2020.
    doi: [10.1093/cid/ciaa491](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa491).
    PubMed PMID: 32337584

[^49]: Htun, HL., Lim, DW., Kyaw, WM., Loh, W-NJ., Lee, LT., Ang, B. et
    al. (2020) Responding to the COVID-19 outbreak in Singapore: Staff
    Protection and Staff Temperature and Sickness Surveillance Systems.
    Clin Infect Dis. 2020. doi:
    [10.1093/cid/ciaa468](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa468). PubMed
    PMID: 32315026

[^50]: Kim, YJ., Jeong, YJ., Kim, SH., Kim, YJ., Lee, SY., Kim, TY. et
    al. (2020) Preparedness for COVID-19 infection prevention in Korea:
    a single-centre experience. J Hosp Infect. 2020. doi:
    [10.1016/j.jhin.2020.04.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2020.04.018)

[^51]: Klompas, M., Morris, CA., Sinclair, J., Pearson, M., Shenoy, ES.
    (2020) Universal Masking in Hospitals in the Covid-19 Era. N Engl J
    Med. 2020. doi:
    [10.1056/NEJMp2006372](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp2006372).
    PubMed PMID: 32237672

[^52]: Wee, LE., Conceicao, EP., Sim, XYJ., Aung, MK., Tan, KY., Wong,
    HM. et al. (2020) Minimising intra-hospital transmission of
    COVID-19: the role of social distancing. J Hosp Infect. 2020. doi:
    [10.1016/j.jhin.2020.04.016](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.jhin.2020.04.016).
    PubMed PMID: 32294511

[^53]: While potentially useful, entry-screening like all testing
    procedures, are open to generating false-positive and false-negative
    results. One aspect of this is the variation in sensitivity and
    specificity of tests across the duration of individuals’ infections
    and how the specimen is collected. A second aspect is that test
    result intreptation should take into account current epidemic
    circumstances, since positive and negative predictive values vary
    with population prevalence.

[^54]: DELVE: Data Evaluation and Learning for Viral Epidemics (2020)
    Face Masks for the General Public. Published 4 May. Report No 2.
    Available from:
    <https://rs-delve.github.io/reports/2020/05/04/face-masks-for-the-general-public.html>

[^55]: Duerden, B., Fry, C., Johnson, AP., Wilcox, MH. (2015) The
    control of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus blood stream
    infections in England. Open Forum Infectious Diseases.
    2015;2(2):ofv035. doi:
    [10.1093/ofid/ofv013](https://doi.org/10.1093/ofid/ofv013)

